F:	We're here with Ramon Cestero doing central line placement.
Craig:	So this procedure, the central line placement or I think another way I've 
come across it is the central catheter placement, and what is the objective 
and the reasons for doing a central line placement?
Cestero:	To obtain venous access, number one.  When you can't obtain peripheral 
IV access.  Number two, would be we need to get medications that are 
only compatible with central lines, central access, large veins.  Three, 
monitoring central venous pressure.  Four, preparation for Swan Ganz 
catheter replacement.  Those would be the main ones.
Craig:	Okay.  So the objective is to gain access to the central vein, but the 
reasons for doing it would be those that you just listed?
Cestero:	Correct.
Craig:	Okay.  So are there an contraindications for why you would not do a 
central line placement?
Cestero:	History of prior thrombotic disease in the central vein that you're going for, 
because you're covering the central vein, you're covering femoral, you're 
covering internal jugular, you're covering subclavian.  Right?
F:	Yeah.
Craig:	All three.
Cestero:	So if you have some evidence of prior thrombosis and that vein is now 
clotted, it's not available.  Or a prior history of lymphedema in the 
ipsilateral extremity.  If they had a dissection up in their... lymph node 
dissection in their maxilla, and now they have a big, swollen arm, 
everything drains in their vein, so you potentially damage that vein, then 
they're not going to get any drainage from here, and it's just going to get 
worse.  And that would just account for subclavian, or in the legs, it'd be 
for the femorals.  IJ doesn't matter.  What else?  Those would really be 
the big ones.
Craig:	And how long does a central line...
Cestero:	Trauma to that area.  Burns.  I would choose another site.
Craig:	Opposite side or (overtalking)...?
Cestero:	A skin infection, infection in that site.  I would choose another site.
Craig:	So the opposite side of wherever sort of damage or trauma...
Cestero:	Opposite or alternate.
Craig:	Alternate, okay.  And how long does a typical successful central line 
placement take? 
Cestero:	For me or for a resident?
Craig:	How long should it take?
F:	How long should it take?
Craig:	How long should it take?
F:	What's ideal?
Cestero:	Between the time that when you're gathering your equipment to the time 
that you're finishing the x-ray (overtalking)...?
Craig:	From the point you decide you're going to perform one and when it's 
done.
Cestero:	It takes me about anywhere from two minutes to ten minutes to find all my 
equipment, and then you have to prep out everything, so with a local prep, 
and then putting on the drapes, universal precautions takes another few 
minutes, and then from the time you stick the needle in to getting it in 
takes me about usually two minutes depending on how easy... how 
accessible it is in the patient, how the anatomy is, how volume loaded 
they are, if they're hypovolemic the vein's very small.  If they've got... if 
they're normal it's going to be fairly big and it's easy to find.  Yeah, so 
anywhere from two minutes to... if it's a difficult stick it can take anywhere 
from ten minutes.
F:	So is there any problem with it taking longer like as opposed to the CRIC 
where you really got to (overtalking)...?
Cestero:	No, there's no problem from that standpoint.  There's usually if you're 
taking longer you're probably having difficulty finding the vein, which then 
implies you're probably doing multiple passes, and we know the more 
passes you make, the more likelihood of getting a pneumothorax with it or 
arterial injury.  Usually pneumothorax is a bigger complication with a 
subclavian.  If we're talking about IJs, it's different.  IJs usually you do 
(inaudible)..., so you shouldn't have multiple passes.  Femoral, there 
really is no risk of pneumothorax there.  So but for subclavian, which is 
our most common access point, (overtalking)...
Craig:	(Overtalking)... only because we will get an opportunity to do all that.  
Again, I think, for me, what's really helpful is like and this is where you 
said, Patrick, you're going to borrow from me is, because the way I sort of 
visualize everything is like a leaflet.  Man, these days you have the tri-fold 
pamphlets.  We're talking about the leaflet with very limited space.  What 
would be the major headings for the central line placement?
Cestero:	Okay.  Which central line placement?  
Craig:	Well, I think...
Cestero:	(Overtalking)... different.
F:	I would do a subclavian, because that's what you normally do, and then 
we'll go back.  We'll backtrack and you can tell us (overtalking)...
Cestero:	Okay.  Because now I'll just talk about subclavian.
Craig:	So, it seems to me, like right now you're telling me that the very first task 
is to decide which one you need to do.
Cestero:	Um-hmm.  Yeah.
Craig:	So deciding on location.  So now you've made a decision and for this...
Cestero:	Actually, before we do that do you want to...
Craig:	Well, I'll come back to that.
Cestero:	Okay.  
Craig:	Yeah, I can do that.  So you've decided on a place, and for this purpose 
we chose subclavian.
Cestero:	Okay.
Craig:	So from there can you take us through the major...
Cestero:	So then there's which side, right?  (Overtalking)...
Craig:	Decide side.  Okay.  The left side?
Cestero:	I usually go to the left side, because if you're going to end up doing a 
Swan Ganz catheter, which is a catheter that goes into the heart for 
hypotension or volume status, etc., it's easier to put that in through the left 
side.  So I would usually if I have equal options, I usually go to the left 
side.  If, for whatever reason, the patient has trauma on that side or a 
broken clavicle, and that's another fracture, clavicle trauma to the area, is 
a contraindication, and I'll go to the opposite side.  So once I decide a 
subclavian, then... which part do you want me to talk about?  The 
preparation?
Craig:	No, so you...
F:	Just what's the tasks.
Craig:	Right.  So the major headings.  So a major heading, you said the first one 
is you first need to decide on which site.
Cestero:	Okay.  So obtaining which... and there's another different kind of catheters 
you put in.  So whether you put in, what's called, a cordis, which is a large 
bore catheter through which a central line can go in or where they just put 
in a central... not a central.  I'll say a triple-lumen catheter, can go through 
the cordis.  So whether you decide to put in a cordis versus a triple-lumen 
or double-lumen catheter, it would then be the next decision, because you 
got to go find the equipment for it.  There are different sets.  So once 
identified which one I'll put in, they're both put in pretty much the same 
way.  Then obtain consent and all that stuff, right?  So it's kind of 
assumed.
F:	So that's kind of preparing, right?
Cestero:	Yeah, that's preparation.
F:	It goes under preparation.
Cestero:	We need to take consent from the family.  It doesn't have anything to do 
with the actual procedure, but medical legal stuff.  You do that, then you 
prep the patient.  Some people will probably tell you they put a roll behind 
the neck or the spine to expand.  I don't do any of that.  I just lay the 
patient flat.  I prep the area, widely, around the clavicle, around the 
sternum with the whole area, and then I drape out.  So I drape out the 
whole bed with a big sheet.
Craig:	So this is still within the prep?  Because I'm running out of space on my 
leaflet here.  I want to make sure that the major headings are taken care 
of, and then depending on how much the publishing people charges, we 
got that limited space to talk about the very specific details.
Cestero:	Okay.  So preparation.  And now put under preparation, we'll just say all 
that stuff I just talked about.  So identification, which we can put in, the 
consent and cleaning up the area and draping it out.
Craig:	Perfect.  Thank you.
Cestero:	And now I'm sterile, too.  I'm wearing my sterile gown, gloves, etc.  So 
that's preparation.  Now, identifying where you're going to put in your... 
where you're going to insert your needle.  The way I do that is I put my 
index in the sternal notch, put my thumb out as lateral as I can on the 
clavicle, I drop my index.  Where my knuckle goes under the clavicle, 
that's where I want my needle to insert into the vein, not the skin, the vein.  
My skin insertion is going to be about one centimeter or two centimeters 
lateral to that, so that it's a nice gradual line to the clavicle... or to the vein, 
which lives under the clavicle.  If I had a model I could show you what I'm 
talking about, because a common problem is that people do right under 
the clavicle, they put a needle, then they flatten it out to get under the 
vein, and then you got a sharp corner there.  When you have a needle 
there, that's fine, because it's stiff.  Once you take that needle out, you put 
a soft catheter, like a cordis, there's going to be a bend there, and then 
there's going to be a bend on this plastic, and it doesn't flow very 
(overtalking)....
Craig:	Blockage.
Cestero:	And then your nurses tell you it doesn't flow or they can't get blood back, 
or you try to put something through it like a Swan Ganz catheter, and you 
can't get it through.  So that's why I go a little more lateral, so it's a nice 
gradual thing rather than a...
F:	So I have tasks, four is identify landmarks and task five is insert needle.
Cestero:	Correct.
F:	Would you chunk it that way?
Cestero:	Yeah, sure.
F:	Then what's the next big chunk?  Because we're going to go back 
(overtalking)...
Cestero:	So insert needle, aspirate as you move towards the sternal notch.  When 
you get blood... or you get venous blood, dark blood, then take off your 
syringe, hold needle in place, pass wire, take out needle, pass dilator, 
take out dilator.
Craig:	They're going to charge us extra now, because (overtalking)...
F:	That's okay.  Just keep going.
Cestero:	Then you better get some funding.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	Because these are the steps.
F:	Okay.  Keep going.
Cestero:	Then put in catheter, take out wire.
F:	We like to leave them in here, though.
Cestero:	Yeah.  Take out wire, and identify all your ports flush, they're come back 
with blood, and then irrigate, suture in place.
Craig:	Do you verify placement?
Cestero:	Verify placement with x-ray.
F:	I'll help you out here.
Craig:	Yes, please, because I missed it after like the sixth one.
F:	So we have task one, decide on location.  Task two, decide on catheter.  
Task Three, preparation.  Task four, identify landmarks.  Task five, insert 
needle.  
Cestero:	Well, you can... for insert needle, if you want that insert catheter.  I mean, 
that's a big step, and then verification of placement.
F:	Okay.  Aspirate, task six.  Task seven, pass wire.  Task eight, pass dilator.  
Task nine, insert catheter, remove...
Cestero:	With dilator.
F:	With dilator.
Cestero:	It depends what you're putting in, it's different.
F:	Okay.  Well, we're going to go back to that.  And then check to make sure 
that it... like, I guess, verify?
Cestero:	Yeah.  To verify blood draw.
F:	Verification that it's working.  Okay, verification.  And then check 
placement?
Cestero:	Suture into place.
F:	And then secure.
Cestero:	(Overtalking)... dressing.
F:	We'll put that under secure.
Cestero:	Sure.
F:	Okay.  Check placement.  Okay.  So let's go back to step one, decide on 
location.  How do you do that?
Cestero:	For me, we, the surgeons, are most comfortable with subclavian lines.  
There's good data supporting the sterility of the location as opposed to 
like a femoral that gets infected more frequently.  We have minimal 
complications with experienced personnel, and we're very comfortable 
with it.  So most surgeons will go for a subclavian approach.  The 
medicine folks are more comfortable, because it's the way their training 
was to do IJs.  For us, the subclavian approach is more comfortable for 
the patient.  It's not in their neck, they're moving around, etc.  So we'll do 
subclavians, I will do subclavians.  Now, in the emergency room it's a little 
different deal sometimes.  Sometimes we're not putting in the line, it's 
usually the emergency resident, and they're more comfortable with 
femorals, because it's away from all the action.  When people are getting 
intubated, etc., you just try to gain access and they'll do femoral 
approaches.  For us, the problem with that is, if you're bleeding in your 
belly and put a femoral line in, and you're putting blood through that, 
you're going to bleed in the belly.  Whereas if you are bleeding in the 
belly, you put blood into here, it goes right to your heart, and it comes out 
from there.  So we prefer subclavian approaches.  That's usually our first 
choice.  Second choice would be IJ, third would be femoral.
F:	So when would you choose the IJ over the subclavian?  What are the 
indications of (overtalking)...
Cestero:	The contraindications are the ones I spoke about before.  Let's say they 
have a bilateral clavicle fractures or bilateral burns to the skin or bilateral 
trauma or previous evidence of thrombosis to the subclavians, 
lymphedema in both arms.  I mean, rare stuff.
F:	So you'd start on this side, that would be you...
Cestero:	You start on the left.
F:	You start on the left for subclavian, and it's usually right IJ?  Is that...
Cestero:	Right IJ, it doesn't matter for me.  I'll do either one.  I usually end up 
doing, if I can't get it here, I'll usually prep out the neck as well, so that I 
can switch over without having to do a re-prep.
PC:	So if you can't do the left subclavian, you don't go right subclavian, you 
go...
Cestero:	(Inaudible)... IJ, because once you've stuck somebody several times 
there's always a risk of pneumothorax, and the only way you can really 
tell you have pneumothorax is with an x-ray.  So that means if I want to 
move over here, and the patient's not dying, I can then take everything 
off, call x-ray, wait two hours for them to come up and do their STAT x-
ray, then read it, and then if there's no pneumothorax, then I can move to 
the other side, because what if you have pneumothorax here, you move 
to the other side and you give this guy pneumothorax here as well?
F:	Now, you're in trouble.
Cestero:	Yeah.  The patient can then code, so you don't want to do that unless it's 
an emergency setting.  So I usually go to the same side (inaudible)... 
pneumothorax, and I find out on the x-ray, that's fine.  It's on the same 
side.
PC:	So let's say that you do go one side, and then go to the...
Cestero:	IJ.
PC:	...IJ, and some how or another you can't do either.
Cestero:	Then I will stop and get the x-ray, and then come and try the other side 
later on.
PC:	Okay.  So you wouldn't go down to the...
Cestero:	It depends.  If the patient's hypotensive, needs to access, we can't get a 
peripheral line, absolutely I'll go down to the femoral.
Craig:	Your top preference is the left subclavian, left IJ...
Cestero:	No.  I mean, by starting off, is the patient just laying there and I haven't 
done anything yet?
Craig:	Yes.
Cestero:	Then left subclavian, right subclavian, then either IJ, it doesn't matter to 
me, and then the femoral.
Craig:	Either... okay.  That's before anything has started.  It's just your straight 
preference.
Cestero:	And if I'm already prepped and spent like 15 minutes gathering all my 
junk, and I don't want to wait for the x-ray and all that stuff, and then you 
have to come back, because I'm in the OR, just out of practical, I'll go to 
the left IJ if I can't get the subclavian on that same side.
PC:	And if left subclavian is... contraindications for less (inaudible)..., you won't 
even go to the left IJ, you'll just...
Cestero:	I'll do the right subclavian.
PC:  	Right.  Okay.
F:	Okay.  Now, that's step one.
Cestero:	That brochure is just getting bigger.
F:	That's for sure, and miles long.  Now, deciding on a catheter, how do you 
do that?
Cestero:	So basically two types of catheters, the cordis, and then the triple-lumen 
or double-lumen, those are... or single-lumen.
F:	That's the same, am I correct?
Cestero:	Yeah.
F:	Just wanting support?
Cestero:	Yes, exactly.
F:	This is a joke between us.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	So if the patient's going to require higher amounts of volume like blood or 
lots of saline, etc., I use a cordis, because it's bigger and fatter, so that 
you can run more volume through it.  If they require a Swan Ganz, I'm 
going to use a cordis.  If... what else?  If I don't know, because I'm in the 
ER and the patient's just unstable, I'll put in a cordis.  And then if it's a 
matter that the patient requires medications that... the patient's stable, 
requires medications that can only be given through a large-bore vein, I'll 
put a triple or double-lumen.  That way it gives the nurses more 
availability to give different types of drugs, you can give nutrition through 
it, they can do blood draws, etc.  So then I'll just do a triple-lumen.
PC:	Thank you for the (inaudible)..., by the way.
[LAUGHTER]
PC:	When we code this, you just made our lives so much easier.
Craig:	Okay.  So you first make the decision, a cordis versus a lumen.  And then 
after you've chosen a lumen, then you decide single, double or triple.
Cestero:	Sure.  I'll usually do the triple.  I'll go straight to triple, because a single 
lumen is not very helpful to a nurse when the patient then requires two 
medications and it can only be given through here.  I've got to come back 
and change it to a double- or triple-lumen.  So you know what?  I'll just put 
a triple-lumen.
Craig:	See, there's a very good reason for that.
PC:	Yeah, it makes sense.
Cestero:	Well, it's practical.  There's no medical reason, it's just practical, I don't 
have to come back.
F:	You don't have to get bugged.  So let's talk about preparation.  What do 
you do during the preparation phase?
Cestero:	So identify equipment, locating it, so it's gloves (inaudible)... to your size, 
the actual kit, extra towels if you need it, sterile towels, saline, cap, mask, 
gloves, eye protection, a big sheet if it doesn't come in the set to cover the 
whole bed.  And that's just for the equipment.  And a table to use to put it 
on.  And then as far as the patient, make sure all the wires are out of the 
way, the endotracheal tube isn't directly over there, you're going to 
operating on, twisting it over, letting the nurse know, they can help you 
out, and then taking their gown and everything else off, so that you can 
prep out this area and it won't be contaminated, and then you prep, then 
laying out the drape that covers the whole bed, and then your gown.  
That's the prep.
F:	Okay.  And would you do the same thing for all three sites, what you just 
described?
Cestero:	Yes.
F:	Or would they vary at all?
Cestero:	No, that would pretty much be universal.
Craig:	What are you prepping with?
Cestero:	Chlorhexidine.
PC:	Is the patient going to be in the same position for all three procedures?
Cestero:	They'll all be supine, and when you're doing an IJ, it's easy to have the 
patient's neck turned away from the side you're operating on, which is a 
problem if a patient's in C-spine precautions, cervical spine precautions.  
You obviously can't have them move.  So that would be a contraindication 
for your IJ, right there, C-spine precaution.  You can still do a subclavian, 
because the collar only comes down to about here.
F:	Can you show these guys what supine is?
Cestero:	On your back.
F:	It's a silly question.
Cestero:	On your back.
F:	Now, we had that conversation in class.  They actually Googled it, and in 
the literature it has people on their stomachs.
Cestero:	Oh, really?
F:	Yeah, but supine is on your back.  They didn't believe me.
Cestero:	That's what we call a prone position.
PC:	Prone position.
Cestero:	Yeah.
F:	Okay.  Any other thing that goes in the... how do you prepare yourself?
Cestero:	Just with the...
F:	Universal Precautions?
Cestero:	Yeah, Universal Precautions.
F:	Okay.  Other questions about this task?  What are some of the things the 
learners have problems with during the prep phase, if any, that you 
routinely see?
Cestero:	Not prepping out widely enough, because they only prep out the 
immediate area where they put the needle, not the sternal notch, which I 
also use as a landmark, and you'll probably put your finger over there, so 
and you may move along the clavicle medially or laterally.  So not doing it 
widely enough.  That's really it.
F:	Okay.  All right.  So now we're on identify landmarks.  So walk us through 
that.  How do you do that?
Cestero:	So for subclavian I will have my middle finger in the sternal notch, my 
thumb out, as far out on my clavicle as I can, and then I'll drop my index.  
Where my knuckle goes into the clavicle, that's going to be where I want 
my needle to enter the vein, and so I go about maybe... probably two 
centimeters lateral over that, is where my needle will enter the skin.
PC:	Is that spacing going to be the same for all people's hands or is that 
something you just learned?
Cestero:	Well, it works for me, and it works for... I let the residents do it, because it 
gives them a good idea, and it works for pretty much everybody... 
everybody I taught.  Except for, you know what?  I usually put my hands 
on the patient when I do it.  Yeah, but eventually it will work.  And, to be 
honest, the thumb doesn't even matter.  That's just what I tell people, 
because that's what they practice, you know, students need to fixate on 
something, so they do a finger here, a finger here, and I drop my knuckle, 
but really it doesn't matter, just drop your knuckle.
Craig:	It sounds fun.
Cestero:	And it's usually where the curvature of the clavicle is, where it kind of it 
curves.  And it's just an extra thing for students kind of walk away with and 
go, 'Oh, that's the way it works.'  So once I identify that I will sometimes 
numb up the skin, sometimes not depending if the patient's out of it or not.  
And then I will insert my needle... oh, so you have to prepare... I guess 
this is preparation of the kit.  So if I had a kit I could show you.  I don't 
know how you're going to describe it.  There's a big, fat needle in there.  I 
always find the fattest needle in the set.  It's the largest one.  It's long, it's 
fat, it's universal in every set.  I use that.  I put that on my syringe.  So 
that's ready to go.  I got my wire, and I usually lay this either on my table 
or on the patient.  Preferably on the table if the patient has any chance of 
waking up and kicking, and knocking all my stuff to the floor.  If they're 
completely out of it, intubated, sedated, etc., I'll just put it right on them.  
And I'll have my wire and I'll set it up, so that when the wire comes out it 
curves.  It's very soft, but it's designed to go curve, so it goes in anything, 
it can't go through the vein.  So but I'll curve it, so it goes... if I'm putting it 
here, it curves and it goes down this way, so it goes towards the heart as 
opposed to going up and maybe catching on the IJ as it comes by.  If it's 
on this side, I'll set it up so that it goes down this way, so either it's... it's 
180 as I set it up on my bed, so it's ready to go.  I'll have my scalpel out 
and I'll have that ready to go.  I'll have my catheter out and I'll have that 
pre-flushed with saline, so there's no air in the tubing system.  I'll have 
that all ready.  So I go step, step, step, step.  So my resident isn't 
confused about it, and just goes step, step, step, step without making my 
(inaudible)....
F:	So would you do that before you identify your landmarks then?  
Cestero:	Yeah, preparation.
F:	Okay.  So that's back in preparation.
Cestero:	Yeah.
F:	Okay.  So now we've talked about landmarks for subclavian, what about 
IJ and femoral?  What are those landmarks?
PC:	I'm sorry.  Landmarks are the same on both sides for...
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
PC:	Okay.  
Cestero:	Yeah.  So for IJ, you'd like to identify your landmarks.  It's the ultrasound 
(inaudible)..., that's kind of the standard of care now.  So but I will identify 
the sternal heads, sternocleidomastoid heads, and where they divert.  
Identify the apex of that triangle, but it's usually where I'm going to put my 
needle, and that's where I'll start looking with my ultrasound.
F:	Okay.  And what about femoral?
Cestero:	Femoral, you identify where your vein is, which first identify where your 
artery is, which is 50 percent from your anterior superior spine to your 
pubic tubercle.  Identify those with those fingers, then draw an imaginary 
line, 50 percent of that distance is your artery, and then you go one finger 
breadth medially to that, and that's where your vein is, and that's where 
you'll start poking.
PC:	Do you do it by sight or would you...
Cestero:	Palpation.
PC:	Palpation, but would you use ultrasound at all?
Cestero:	I don't.
F:	Okay.  Now, we're at task five, insert needle.
Cestero:	Okay.
F:	Oh, wait.  I'm sorry.  Let's back up for a second.  Task four, identify 
landmarks.  What are some of the pitfalls that your learners, that you've 
seen...
Cestero:	Usually I identify it for them.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	Because this is not something you want to get a complication from.
F:	Practice.
Cestero:	So, I don't know, because I usually tell them where to put the needle.  If 
I'm doing it with them, I tell them where to put it.  Because usually if 
they're experienced enough, I'm not really there.  I mean, I'm there, but 
just I let them do it kind of on their own if they say they're experienced 
enough.  Usually the more junior residents are the ones that are 
physically scrubbed in.
Craig:	For the IJ you were talking about having the neck turned.  For the femoral 
are the legs straight?
Cestero:	Yeah, if possible, if the patient allows it, if they don't have a pelvic 
fracture, you'd like to have their leg extended or rotated out.  You got to 
open up that space.
F:	Okay.  Other questions for that task?  Okay.  Task five, insert needle.  So 
we can just focus maybe on the subclavian, and if there's big differences 
you can just point them out, so you don't have to go through each thing 
for each site.
Cestero:	I do it a little differently than it's taught in any of your books.  I bend my 
needle, which I don't think is probably approved by the company.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	But it works about a hundred percent of the time, and it's usually the 
method of last resort for like all the other fellows and stuff.  So I will not tell 
you about that way, I guess, unless you want to hear about it.
F:	Well, now we want to hear what you do.  This is great.
Cestero:	So what typically ends up happening when you can't... sometimes 
people's shoulders are in the way, and you need to be perpendicular to 
the floor in order to get the needle to go underneath the clavicle, because 
the vein is right behind it.  So what we try to do is, if this is your clavicle 
and your veins are running over here, you need to get your needle deep 
enough, so the tip of it is underneath your clavicle.  So I put them in at 45 
degrees about 1 or 2 centimeters and you flatten it out, and then you will 
go in as you aspirate until you get blood, because now you've entered the 
needle.  What sometimes happens is there's... the humeral head is out 
here, so you can't flatten out your syringe.  Your needle will be able to 
flatten out if you could flatten the whole thing out, but the whole complex 
is about this big with the syringe and the needle, and you end up hitting 
the clavicle, and you can't flatten out.  So what I do is I put about a 20-
degree bend in the needle, so that my needle is perpendicular to the floor, 
although my syringe is still sticking up in the air.  Now, that can cause 
complications, because we're taught to sometimes to turn our needle, and 
if it's straight it's not a problem, because it just rotates around the same 
axis.  If it's bent and you rotate, now you've turned it into a knife.  So if 
you're in the wrong space, you're out by the artery or by the vein, you're 
going to just be making a big laceration.  So it's really for more 
experienced residents or the fellows to do that, but possibly it's putting the 
needle in 45 degrees and flattening it out, so that you're perpendicular to 
the floor, and then inserting until you hit the needle as you guide it 
towards your sternal notch.  So at that insertion point I talked about 1 or 2 
centimeters lateral, insert at 45 degrees or 1 to 2 centimeters, flatten out, 
aim towards your sternal notch, and as you aspirate at all times, because 
otherwise you won't know you're in the vein, go very slowly behind your 
clavicle until you get flash, which means blood coming into your syringe, 
and you hope that's dark, because that's more suggestive of venous 
blood rather than bright, which would be arterial, and at that point you've 
entered the vein.  Another trick, which I use for the residents, is once it 
goes in at 45 degrees and flatten out, to go in and poke the clavicle, so 
they know in their mind, because you can't see it, you're... it's all kind of 
by feel, you visualize where the clavicle is and kind of walk your syringe or 
your needle down underneath the clavicle until it slides under, and as 
soon as it slides under you should be in the same proximity of the vein.  
Does that make sense?
F:	Yes.  This bent needle business, is that something that would be a last 
ditch thing or do you just routinely do that?
Cestero:	I do it every time.  If I'm teaching a brand new student, I'll let them do the 
flat until they can't get it, because they sometimes won't be able to, 
because they can't flatten out, and then I'll just (overtalking)...
F:	So that's kind of like a little secret trick of the trade.
Cestero:	Yes.  Because I can't have a student doing this in there.  I'll end up 
causing a big problem.
Craig:	I have a question.  So it's kind of a decision step.  If you're trying to do the 
flat, and you can't do this, instead of switch to another site, you're going to 
bend the...
Cestero:	Oh yeah, I wouldn't change to another site.  I do it when I start, because 
I'm just comfortable with it.
F:	Because you have it automated and you're an expert.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	Yeah, and I know it works, and I just take that first step of not being able 
to get it, I take it out, because this method works like 98 percent of the 
time.
Craig:	But when you visually see the patient, you know the shoulder's like that, 
you know there's going to be complications? 
Cestero:	Sometimes.
Craig:	So would that be an indication to choose a different site based on the...
Cestero:	No.  No, because the other shoulder will be the same.  It's not because of 
injury, it's because of their anatomy.  Now, some people will put a roll in 
the spine, and that hopefully will open that up a little bit.  I just don't want 
to bother with finding a towel and rolling it up, and putting it behind the 
patient.  I'm very fast.  
F:	So it sounds like task six, which is aspirate, move towards sternal notch, it 
sounds like you just described that, so I think those kind of were 
combined into one task.  Would you agree?
Cestero:	Sure.
F:	Okay.  Anybody have any comments so far?
Craig:	Yes.  Okay.  So if they're awake you're going to give a local anesthesia, 
and are you doing that as you're finding the vein or...
Cestero:	No, no, no.  You just do... before you insert your big needle, because it's a 
pretty fat needle, and you just insert some Lidocaine at the skin where 
you're going to insert, and maybe on the track where you're going to go.  
And that's optional.
PC:	And it's going to be... so we've got both sides subclavian.  It's going to be 
the same thing.  It's 45 flat, walk down the clavicle?
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
F:	Okay.  So now we have the needle in, and we've gotten venous return.  
Where are we now?  I have pass wire.
Cestero:	So then you have venous return, you got good flashback, you know you're 
in the vein.  And now with your non-dominant hand you're going to secure 
the needle  and it's going to... you're going to rest against the patient, and 
that hand is not going to move until you get your wire in place.  Similar to 
the CRIC.  That stabilizes that wire.  You know you're in the vein.  That 
needs to be very still.  So now you take your syringe off, and now you 
have your wire ready to go, because you've already laid it out.  You pass 
your wire in the direction you want it, so that the little curve goes in the 
direction you intended.  Put it in, making certain there's no resistance.  
Once you get the wire...
PC:	What if there is?
Cestero:	If there is, then remove the wire, bring it back into the little housing, put 
your syringe back on and make sure you still have good flow.  You may 
have moved a little bit.  You may have been at the edge of the vein.  You 
may have just skived it, etc.  So make sure you have some flow.  You may 
want to move a little bit in or out.  If you still maintain you have good flow, 
try again.  And just do that until you good pass of the wire.  If you get 
resistance you're not in the right spot, because really... or there's a clot 
there or there's a problem.
Craig:	Is there a limit on how many times you could get... retry?
Cestero:	Well, I mean, yeah, if I did eight times and I was sure I was in the vein, 
there's something wrong.  There's something going on.  And I may be re-
sticking it a little lateral or something.  I mean, that's like a rare 
(inaudible)...
PC:	When you're passing the wire, obviously, it's going to go smoothly how 
far?
Cestero:	Until I have about that far on the end.
[LAUGHTER]
Cestero:	Sometimes if a patient... usually a patient will be on a monitor in the VICU, 
and the wire can actually stimulate the heart to get some extra beats, and 
you might see that on your monitor, and you might pull back a bit.
Craig:	So are you using the length of the cord this kit comes with to help you 
determine how deep to go in?
Cestero:	Yeah.  Each cord, each set has a wire that's designed for that catheter 
that you're putting in.
Craig:	So the length matches with the type of catheter, not where you're going to 
use it, because...
Cestero:	Which is going to be a problem.  I'll tell why.  If you're putting in the little 
cordis I talked about, that wire is much shorter than the one for the triple-
lumen, or at least depending on the brand you're using.  So if you're trying 
to change one out for the other, this is a little more advanced, but if you're 
trying to change one out, and you put in a very short wire into a longer 
catheter, what happens is you end up not having enough wire to do the 
other one, and it ends up coming out.
Craig:	That's a complication.
PC:	The other wire now, in where you want it.
Cestero:	(Slide?) the wire in where you want it.
F:	So I have collapse, take off syringe and pass wire into kind of one task.  
Again, problems learners face during this phase?
Cestero:	Not stabilizing the needle, and then the needle migrates.  Sometimes you 
have millimeters here as far as how big the vein is.  Not knowing how to 
feed the wire.  These usually are thumb-driven.  They have a little housing 
and you just kind of thread it with your thumb, and they have no idea how 
to do that.  Not having... familiar with the wire knowing that it bends as it 
comes, so there's a little straightener, so they don't know anything about 
that.  They like bring the wire out a little bit, and now it's bent, now they're 
trying to pass it into the catheter, so it doesn't really work, and then they 
get frustrated.  So that's why, yeah, it's preset up.  It's very helpful, 
because the wire's already withdrawn to the housing and it's not straight.  
Those are about it.
F:	Okay.  So the next task I have is pass dilator.
Cestero:	Oh, before that, so now you have your wire in, you remove your needle.  
Leave the wire in place.  Then, actually, before the dilator I'll use my 
scalpel, and I'll make a nick in the skin wide enough for whatever catheter 
I'm putting in.  The cordis is a little fatter than the triple-lumen, so I just 
basically make a little divot.  Then I'll pass my dilator.  In some units it's a 
dilator plus a catheter together for the cordis, they both go in as one unit.  
For the triple-lumen it's two separate things.  One is the dilator, pass 
dilator, bring that out leaving the wire in place, always holding onto the 
wire, and then putting the catheter through the wire, and then once the 
wire's in place, then... I mean, the catheter's in place, I remove the wire.
F:	Okay.  Questions?  Did you guys get all that?
PC:	Um-hmm.
F:	And then problems learners face doing that piece?
Cestero:	Sometimes it requires a little bit of pressure to pass the dilator, because 
you're dilating some tissues that are pretty hard underneath the clavicle, 
so it requires a little bit of force and they get a little timid about that.  When 
you're passing the cordis, it's the cordis catheter plus the dilator in it.  It 
can become separated.  If you're pushing just the cordis, the dilator gets 
pushed back.  If that happens the cordis doesn't flush with the plastic at 
the end, and there's a little jump... there's a little step that gets caught on 
tissue, then they can't thread it.  And the other one that's common, as I 
told you earlier, some people do a 45-degree stick right by the clavicle 
and they flatten it, and now you've got a very, very steep angle through 
some very tough tissues, and that can be difficult to pass, and they have 
problems later with the collapse of the whole catheter.
F:	Okay.  So now we just removed the wire.
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
F:	Where are we now?  What's next?
Cestero:	So the catheter's in place, wire's out.  I have a syringe already filled up 
with saline that I aspirate a little bit of blood in each of the ports to make 
sure that they flow freely.  If blood comes back in the tubing I know it's 
connected to the vein.  I know there's easy flow.  I'll irrigate with the saline 
to get the blood out of the system, so it won't clot, and then I'll lock the 
catheter and I'll put the Luer-lock or whatever the nurses give me to 
attach it.  And then I'll do that for each of the three ports, and then I'll 
suture into place with the nylon, 2-0 nylon suture.
F:	Okay.  So as far as... so I kind of have checking the ports, irrigating and 
locking the catheter as sort of verification that everything's working okay.  
And then you would secure it before you check... I have check placement 
(overtalking)...
Cestero:	Check placement is more with a... now you're getting an x-ray to see 
where it is.
F:	So secure comes before check placement?
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
F:	Okay.  Anything with the verification or that step, any (overtalking)...?
Cestero:	It's really around verification is your initial stick with... you verified you 
were in a vein, so you know you're there.  And then once you put 
everything in you still have good blood flow, you have (inaudible)... or 
whatever vessel you found.  Could it be artery?  Sure.  If not, you need 
make sure it's not pulsatile, because that would be artery.
F:	Okay.  So when you check all the ports at the end and you flush them, 
and the nurses give you the Luer-lock or whatever, anything learners do 
wrong here?
Cestero:	A lot of them don't know how to tie or sew, because they're students.  But 
the residents shouldn't have a problem.
Craig:	Question.  So obviously the way a surgeon would go about locating the 
vein for the three different sites is going to be different just because of the 
region it's in.  So after you've located from the needlepoint to the 
verification, is it pretty much the same for all three?
Cestero:	The initial insertion?
Craig:	Right.
Cestero:	Yeah.  Yeah, that's pretty standard.  Pretty much everybody would do the 
same steps.  Yeah, it'd be the needle, wire, knife, dilator, catheter.
Craig:	Because the only thing that right now through our time here is that you 
said with the femoral you would never get the heart skipping or... so I 
think that's the...
Cestero:	The wire's not long enough.
Craig:	Yeah.  That's the only difference.  Everything else is pretty much the 
same.
Cestero:	Yeah.  And that's sometimes seen and sometimes not.  I mean, it's not... 
that's the only time I've pulled back the wire a little bit.  Yeah, for the 
femoral I don't even look at the monitor.  If I'm that (high?) there's 
something going on.
PC:	So when you're inserting the wire under subclavian you want it to go down 
towards the bellybutton, I guess.
Cestero:	Towards the heart.
PC:	Towards the heart.  Same thing with the IJ?
Cestero:	Yeah, IJ is not so much more of a straight shot.   With subclavian there's 
an angle.
PC:	There's a curve.  And then for the...
Cestero:	And whether it matters, I don't know.  It may not matter which way you put 
that wire.  It's just the way I've always done it, and you'll probably hear 
that from a lot of us.  It's the way I've always done it, and it works for me.
PC:	And for the femorals they should be coming up?
Cestero:	Yeah.  The wire doesn't matter, because there's no curve.  It's the same... 
there's really... it's just a straight shot, so it doesn't matter which way you 
put that wire.  The only other time I even think about it is for subclavians, 
and I can't tell whether it matters, to be honest with you.  It probably 
doesn't.
F:	So now it's in.  We've secured it.  We've sutured it.  You know it's all 
working.  You've got a chest x-ray.  Are you done?
Cestero:	I'm done.
F:	You're done.  Question, Craig?
Craig:	What do you do with the equipment and all that stuff afterwards?
Cestero:	I usually get... some nurses will be very nice and get rid of everything for 
you if you're in a hurry or something, all the sharps.  I will always throw 
away all my sharps, so no one gets hurt while they're cleaning up my 
stuff, because I know where I put it.  I always put everything in a... I 
always put all my sharp stuff away from me, so I can't reach for it and get 
hurt.  So everything on my tray that's a sharp end is away, the needles, 
syringes, etc.  So I know where they are, and I throw them all away, so no 
one gets hurt while they're cleaning up my stuff, because sometimes I 
have to leave the drapes and all that stuff if it's in an emergency setting, 
and I have to go somewhere else.  But I get rid off all my sharps.  
F:	We're done.  We're finished.
Craig:	Just one last question.  The x-ray.  You said the chest x-ray, do you use 
that for femoral?
Cestero:	X-ray, no.  Chest x-ray, no.
Craig:	Just for IJs?
Cestero:	Just for anything in the chest.  And you're only looking for a potential 
pneumothorax.  
Craig:	That's what you're looking for.
Cestero:	And that's... the other two have that possible complication.
F:	How do you verify the successful placement in a femoral?
Cestero:	Just get dark blood.  Usually have blood.
F:	And you just... okay.
Cestero:	There's no other...
F:	No other thing.
Cestero:	I mean, it's not pulsatile.
PC:	You've got this central line now in, you do the chest x-ray, somehow or 
another you find out that's in completely the wrong place in doing... all 
your (inaudible)... somehow or another, then what?
Cestero:	One of the things that it can curve up into the IJ, so instead of going down 
this way, it comes up here, and then it refluxes back up, and you've got a 
curve.  So then you replace it.  There are a couple options.  You do a 
brand new stick on the other side, because maybe there's a problem 
there, maybe there's a clot that's pushing it or something weird in the 
anatomy.  You may decide to go to the other side, do a brand thing.
PC:	Do you remove the central line?
Cestero:	Yeah.
PC:	Or you leave it?
Cestero:	We normally don't use it if it's going back up into the IJ.  And whether 
there's a problem with that, we don't know, but most of us wouldn't feel 
comfortable leaving it there.  There's probably not enough data out there 
to tell you whether... because we take them all out, so no one leaves them 
in and says, 'Oh, this is a complication that occurs with this.'  We would 
just find a new site.
Craig:	When you take this (ridge?) off is that when you find if it's pulsating or 
(overtalking)...?
Cestero:	Um-hmm.  Usually.  So when you first do your needle and you get blood 
back, you take it off, usually you see a pulsatile there.  It's not a hundred 
percent, you know, maybe they got hypotensive and they're pressure's 
not high enough to really give you anything obvious.  So you can see it 
there, and then at the very end when you have all your ports, you know, 
triple-lumen in or you have three ports, and you're flushing you can see a 
little pulsating thing in the tubing.
F:	What skill level does a person need to do a central line?
Cestero:	About here, because of the recent medical legal stuff, and some of them 
are senior.  But most places, people start doing it as an intern.  I had a 
med student do it today.
F:	So you'd let a med student do it?
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
F:	And what about safety factors?  What are some safety issues or safety 
factors?
Cestero:	Well, potential pneumothorax, hemothorax, arterial injury, venous injury.  I 
mean, you could, like I said, you could lacerate things, you could do 
multiple sticks and just end up with hematoma, infection.  The two we 
really think about and concerned about are pneumothorax and 
(inaudible)....
F:	And then sensory mode information.  Again, not to be repetitive, but you 
rely a lot on tactile.
Cestero:	Tactile and visual.
F:	And visual.
Cestero:	Um-hmm.
F:	So no other sensory...
Cestero:	(Inaudible)....  Yeah, there's no auditory.
F:	There's no favorite smells that you get from a certain...
[LAUGHTER]
Craig:	There's a little scene where you see the pulsatile blood.
Cestero:	Visual.
[MULTIPLE SPEAKERS]
F:	Okay.  Other questions?  No?
PC:	Cool.  Thank you.
F:	Thank you so much.
PC:	This has been very helpful.
[MULTIPLE SPEAKERS]
Cestero:	So next you guys are going to e-mail me something?
PC:	Yeah.  It'll be a couple weeks.  What we're going to do is we'll...
[END FILE]
