KY: 	Today is July 29th.  And we’re here with Dr. Andrew Tang, and we are now going to do the cognitive task analysis on the central line placement or central venous catheter placement.  Let me start off by asking you, first of all, thanking you for your patience, Dr. Tang, and asking you about how many of the CVC or central line placements you have done?
Tang:	I haven’t kept track, but it’s in the hundreds.
KY:	Much more frequent procedure than the (crackotheodomy?).  So hundreds over a span of about seven years since you’ve been a surgeon?
Tang:	Seven years.
KY:	Okay.  And when was the last time you’ve performed one?
Tang:	Yesterday.
KY:	Okay.  All righty.  So the objective here then is of the central line placement is what?
Tang:	The objectives of a central line placement is to deliver medications, fluid, blood, nutrition.  For the most part, that is the reason.  
Q:	For me, I have trouble deciphering between objective and reason, because sometimes they’re very similar.  So if I were to ask for your assistance in sort of discriminating between the two, what would be the objective of doing a CVC versus the reason?
Tang:	Okay.  I see what you’re saying.  I understand.  The objective is to establish venous access to a central vein.  The central vein meaning a vein very close to the heart.
Q:	Thank you.  And the reason would be because you want to have this access to deliver the medicine, the fluids, the blood, nutrition?
Tang:	That’s correct.
Q:	Thank you.  You’re coming into the room, you see the patient there, what are some indications that would signal to you that you need to perform a CVC?
Tang:	For the most part, the central line is not an emergency procedure.  How about this?  I’ll divide it into an emergency indication and a non-emergent indication.  In the emergent indication, for example, in trauma, if the patient is hypotensive and you’re suspecting bleeding, for example, and you do intend to give large volume resuscitation, those will be an indication in an emergency.  In a non-emergent setting it would be one, for example, to give parenteral nutrition for a patient who cannot eat on their own and you can’t feed the patient interally, meaning you can’t feed their intestines.  You have to provide nourishment through an IV.  There are different formulations of nourishment and the formulation that we use more often, which has more calories can only be given through a central vein, a large vein, because it is sclerosing to the peripheral veins.  Peripheral veins meaning the veins in your arms and your legs.  Other indications... we’re talking about indications, right?
Q:	Correct.
Tang:	Other indication is that through one type of central line is called a cordis catheter.  It’s a large OR catheter.  The cordis can... we can give fluid through a cordis a lot faster than we can gave it through a peripheral IV, because the diameter is a lot larger and it’s a shorter catheter.  So that can be used for resuscitation as well in a patient, perhaps not in dire straits, but someone who’s very sick.  And also from a cordis line we can float another instrument.  It’s called a Swan Ganz catheter, and it can only be inserted through a cordis.  So a Swan Ganz catheter can be used to measure the patient’s hemodynamics.  So that would be one indication.  If we intend to float a Swan catheter, then we have to have the cordis catheter and it has to be a central line.  Other indications (sic) is if the patient is in the intensive care unit and we are unsure of the patient’s fluid status, whether they’ve got too much fluid on board, too little fluid on board, and we’re trying to get it just right, central line can measure the patient’s central venous pressure, which can also give us information about a patient’s overall fluid status, that can guide us in our aggressiveness of resuscitation.  Other indications, the central line has... some central lines have three ports, so we can give multiple agents through one line versus having peripheral lines.  Each line can only be run with one agent.
Q:	So that right there you explained was for indications for an emergent situation?
Tang:	No, I moved on to the non-emergent.
Q:	Oh, I mean... okay.  You also said that you can use a CVC to monitor if their... I’m trying to remember.  It almost made it sound like you used it as a way to measure something.
Tang:	Absolutely.  Right.
Q:	Okay.  So that’s in addition to the objective of being able to provide medicine and fluids.  So it’s another...
Tang:	Exactly.  Those are additional indications, I guess.  Additional indications.
Q:	Okay.  Are there any contraindications for when you would not want to perform the CVC?
Tang:	Sure.  If the patient has active bacteremia sepsis.  That’s a relative contraindication.  If the intended site of insertion has an infection over it, then obviously you don’t want to insert a catheter through an infected field.  If the patient’s coagulapathic, meaning they’re not clotting well, then perhaps the coagulopathy should be corrected first prior to inserting the catheter.  I think those are main contraindications.
Q:	I couldn’t help but notice you said ‘relative.’  So are there any absolute?
Tang:	The ones I mentioned afterwards are absolute.
Q:	Okay.  All right.  And how would you know or how long does it typically take to successfully perform a CVC?
Tang:	Ideally, about five to ten minutes.
Q:	Five to ten minutes.  Okay.  And how would you know that it was successfully performed?
Tang:	A couple ways.  One is, after the catheter is in place, you can draw blood back from the catheter, and you can flush fluid into the catheter, and both ways it’s going easily, meaning you can suction out easily and you can flush easily.  Another way is by x-ray to make absolutely sure that it is sitting in the right place.
Q:	Okay.  So x-ray, obviously, would be one of the equipment’s that we need.  What are some other equipments that we would need in order to successfully perform this procedure?
Tang:	Okay.  The equipments would be usually we have a central line kit, and the kit should contain a hat, gloves, a mask, sterile gowns.  Ideally, there should be eye protection as well, but that’s not in the kit itself.  So that’s all for personal protection.  And there should be a gown or a drape for the patient, which covers them from head to toe.  There should be Betadine scrubs, but nowadays we use chlorhexidine, so there should be chlorhexidine around to clean the area that you intend to insert through.  There should be a large gauge needle with a syringe.  There should be a wire.  There should be a knife, a dilator, the catheter itself.  There should be the hubcaps that you place at the end of the catheter.  There should be a sterile dressing that you apply to the skin, and there should be some stitches around, so you can secure the catheter to the skin.
Q:	And most of that is found inside the kit?
Tang:	Most of the stuff.
Q:	Okay.  Most of the stuff.  Now, are there different types of kits?
Tang:	There are different types of central line kits.  We have a couple different types of kits here, and they vary in their degree of completeness.
Q:	Oh, of how much of the items is inside?
Tang:	That I just mentioned.
Q:	Okay.  
Tang:	That’s right.
Q:	So as the surgeon, do you make the decision of which kit you’re going to choose to use or is it already in there when you get there?
Tang:	Well, ideally, we want to use the kit that contains nearly everything that I mentioned, but in circumstances where it’s not available or in a trauma situation where we don’t want to wait, then I’ll use whatever’s around.
Q:	Okay.  Thank you.  CVC or any medical procedure, for that matter, is a very sort of complex procedure, and at this point, I would appreciate your help in breaking that complex piece of procedure into some major chunks, into a list of tasks, if you will.
Tang:	So just like last time, right?
Q:	Yes.
Tang:	Okay.  So as far as procedure goes, number one is to make sure you have all the equipment.  Number two is to position the patient.  Number three is to identify where you want to insert the catheter, because there are six potential sites.  Number four is to clean the area thoroughly.  Number five is to drape yourself.  Number six is to drape the patient.  Number seven is to numb the skin.  Number eight is to establish venous access, meaning use the needle and gain entrance into the vein.  Next, pass the wire.  Next, take out the needle, but leave the wire in.  Next, make a stabbing incision at the skin level where the wire is.  Next, pass the dilator over the wire, and then remove it.  Next, insert the catheter.  Next, take out the wire.  Next, flush the catheter and draw back on the catheter.  Rather, you should draw back first, and then flush second.  Next, suture to the skin.  Next, apply a sterile dressing.  Next, put the caps on the ports.  And, lastly, to remove the dressing or remove the drape.
Q:	Okay.  So I have 20 different larger steps, and Craig here will take these one at a time and break it down further into more detailed steps.
Tang:	Sure.
Q:	Okay.  I have 19.  Is there a way that we can chop some of these down to... if I look through these steps,  equipment, position patient, there’s items that are patient-oriented and there’s items that are self-oriented, and it looks like there’s things about prepping the patient, prepping yourself, identifying location, and then...
Tang:	How about I break it down this way, I’ll try to make fewer larger steps.
Q:	That’d be great.
Tang:	One, is make sure all the equipment’s there.  Two, is position the patient.  Three, is sterilize the patient and sterilize yourself.  Four, place the catheter.  Five, secure the catheter.
Q:	Okay.  So five big general steps.  Thank you very much.  And so what I’m going to do, Dr. Tang, is that I’m going to go through each of these five steps and maybe talk more... drill down more about smaller actions, and maybe decision steps that you come across for each of the steps.
Tang:	Sure.
Q:	Okay.  So you’re being called, “Dr. Tang, we need you for an emergency CVC.”  You’re going into the room.  So your mindset, you already know you’re going to do this, and then you walk into the room.  Your first step is the equipment.  Is that... I think it was asked earlier, is that a decision step that you get to make at that point?  Do you say, “Please, go get me this equipment or this kit?”  Or is it just whatever’s there?
Tang:	It depends on the nature of the emergency.  If it’s live or die, I’ll take whatever’s available.  If I have some time, if it’s even a couple minutes, then I will get the preferred kit.
Q:	Okay.  And the preferred kit... okay, you’d get the preferred kit, and the preferred kit would that be...
Tang:	The preferred kit is a little more complete in the equipment that I would need.  It would have a gown and a glove, and it would have a mask in the kit itself.  It has a larger drape for the patient, for the most part.
Q:	Now, you talked about the different catheters.  At that point, you go to the see the patient based on, maybe kind of like, if/then statements.  If you would use a cordis catheter... a kit with a cordis catheter versus a kit with a triple lumen catheter, I think you mentioned, what would be the decision steps that you would make to use one or the other, or would you always use a cordis first?
Tang:	I think it’s safe to always put in a cordis.  The only disadvantage to having a cordis is, it doesn’t have three ports, it only has one port.  But the advantage is that a triple-lumen catheter can be inserted through a cordis.  So if I had make an absolute choice between the two, I would put in the cordis.
Q:	Okay.  Is there any indications or any reason you would put in the triple- lumen versus a cordis as the first catheter?
Tang:	No, not necessarily.
Q:	So positioning the patient, what position would the patient be in?
Tang:	I would have to make a decision as to which site I’m going to insert the catheter.  So it’s going to be...
Q:	So there’s a... I’m sorry.  There’s a decision before positioning the patient of what site you’re going to locate?
Tang:	Right.  I mean, your potential sites are the internal jugular veins, which are in the neck, your subclavian veins, which are underneath clavicles, or your femoral veins, which are in your groin.  So if I would like to place a line in the IJ or subclavian location, I would prefer the patient to be in a Trendelenberg position.  ‘Trendelenberg’ meaning head down.
Q:	So the head down.
Tang:	Head down.  So more blood pools towards those veins.  The veins get distended, it’s easier to access them.
Q:	Can I stop you there for one second?  
Tang:	Yeah.
Q:	Okay.  You go in and you walk into the room, and then you’re going to decide.  How do you decide which site to do first or what’s your preferable side?
Tang:	It really depends on the situation that you’re in.  The femoral is fairly easy, and let’s say in a trauma situation and the airway is not secure, there’s a team securing the airway, there’s a lot of activities up top, then the groin’s usually left free.  So a groin line or femoral line would be a reasonable line, because you don’t want to fight with other people in an upper body.  But in a situation that’s elective, non-emergent, my preferred choice would be the subclavian, because that’s what I’m most comfortable with, and it’s also been shown that it carries the least of amount of infectious risk for the patient, and it’s most comfortable for the patient.
Q:	Okay.
KY:	So if there’s access up top, then go with the subclavian.  If there’s limited to the head or chest area, then go with the femoral then.
Tang:	That’s correct.  The femoral is the last choice unless it’s an emergent situation.  In an elective situation the femoral line is the last choice, because it’s uncomfortable for the patient, but more importantly, it has the highest infectious risk.
Q:	The femoral area?
Tang:	Yes.  It’s a relatively dirty area on the body.
Q:	Is the position the same for all three...
Tang:	No.  For example, if I’m doing a subclavian or jugular line, the patient should be in a head down position.  If I’m doing a femoral line, they can be in a flat position.
KY:	We talked about the subclavian... in an emergent situation, the subclavian, if there’s access to the chest, would still be preferable over femoral in an emergency situation.  Am I correct?  Did I hear you correct?
Tang:	That is correct.  Unless there’s very significant clavicle fractures and things of that sort.  Barring any of that, I would still prefer a subclavian line.
KY:	Okay.  What would be the criteria for deciding internal jugular, an IJ over... and that would come next after subclavian I assume, since that’s your preferred, but that comes before a femoral, though.
Tang:	Correct.  The reason it’s less desirable compared to a subclavian is because, one, is slightly... it carries a slightly higher infectious risk than the subclavian line and, two, it’s uncomfortable for the patient, because it’s a line hanging around their neck.  Every time they move, they turn their head, there are three ports dangling around, and that’s the reason why I prefer the jugular as my second choice.  And, lastly, the femoral line is my last choice for the reasons I mentioned before.
Q:	You mentioned there were six sites, so I’m assuming it’s two, two and two?
Tang:	Yeah, everything’s double.
Q:	Is there a reason why you would choose a left side versus a right side or...
Tang:	Well, yeah, there are reasons.  For example, if a patient has a known deep venous thrombosis on a particular side, then you may want to go to the other side, because that vein is clotted.  Barring stuff like that, then it’s a personal preference whether you do the right or left.
Q:	Okay.  Thanks.  In prepping the patient and prepping yourself, what would the actions... you kind of discussed what the actions would be for the patient.  Could you go... you’ve decided a landmark.  You’ve decided... let’s just say you have access.  It’s non-emergency.  You’re going to through the subclavicle (sic), and so how would you go about... do you prep yourself first?  Do you prep your patient first?  What are the actions, and are there any decisions that you would make during that time? 
Tang:	I mean, the decision that should be made... well, first of all, I have to make the decision which site I’m going in, because that will determine how the patient is positioned.  Nowadays, the standard of care for inserting it into a jugular line is under ultrasound guidance.  So if I do decide to do an internal jugular line, I have to make sure an ultrasound is there.  So which line would you prefer me to talk about?
Q:	Your most preferred site first?
Tang:	Okay.  So, for example, I’m doing a subclavian line.  Let’s say that I’ll do the right side, and you’re asking me to take you through the steps, right?
Q:	Right.
Tang:	Okay.  So what I would do first is let down the guardrails on the bed, position the bed in a (sic) appropriate height for me, and then put the patient in a head down position.
Q:	Is the position awake at this time?
Tang:	Yeah.  This is a procedure that can be done with the patient wide awake.  Then I would use chlorhexidine and that clean that area widely, a lot wider than I would necessarily need, because I want to maintain the field to be sterile.  For example, usually the way I would prep it would be... I would prep the neck as well just in case I can’t get the subclavian and I decide to go to the neck, then I would have to re-drape again.  So clean and drape... prep the neck.  I would prep all the way to the other side, past the midline, and then I would prep to the nipple, and I would prep all the way to the deltoids.  So I would use chlorhexidine to do the prep.  Then I would make sure my equipment is all open, that the central line kit is open, so that I can access things within the kit, sterilely.  Next, I would have myself gowned and draped, sterilely.  And then I would put a sterile drape on the patient, exposing the area that I intend to use.  In this case, I would have the subclavian area exposed.  Then I would test my equipment in the kit to make sure that all the ports are flushing nicely with saline, and make sure the wire moves back and forth in the roll.  It comes in a ... I don’t think you’ve ever seen before, but it comes in a coil that you can uncoil.  I don’t know if that makes sense.
Q:	Yeah, it does.
Tang:	You kind of have to see it.  Make sure that that moves easily.  Make sure the knife comes in and out of the protective sheath.  Next, I would indentify my landmarks.  For the subclavian it should be about two-thirds of the way lateral from the clavicular edge.  So usually around the delta- pectoral group, about one or two finger breadths below the clavicle.  I would get my Lidocaine and numb up that place.  Next, I would use my large gauge needle, which comes in the kit.  I would insert the needle through the skin, through the numbed area.
Q:	Can I stop you here?
Tang:	Sure.
Q:	Because it looks like we’re going into the area of placing the catheter, and before you get to there I have one question.  You mentioned that you raise the table, and then you put it in Trendelenberg.  Is there an angle or does it depend on the weight and the physical size of the individual of how much of an angle it is?  Is there a seatbelt?
Tang:	No.  I mean, the patient’s not hanging upside down.  So it’s a slight degree of Trendelenberg.  So the position, and the patient’s not sliding off the bed.  
Q:	Okay.  So you’re prepped, the patient’s prepped.  You’re going to do the subclavicle (sic).  You’ve done the anatomical landmarks, and you’ve taken your needle and...
Tang:	Okay.   Then the subclavian then runs underneath the clavicle, and so the direction of the needle travel should be towards the sternal notch.  So that’s my target.  And then the way I do it is, I insert the needle, I hit the clavicle on purpose, and then I do press the needle down, so that the needle’s now sitting below the level of the clavicle.  So I hit the clavicle.  I press everything down without changing the direction of the needle, because I don’t want to hit the lung, which is right underneath.  So if you press everything this way, and then advance my needle again, and I’m aspirating the whole time as I’m back on the needle.
Q:	Pulling back on the needle?
Tang:	That’s correct.  And I’m going to know that I’m in the subclavian vein when I see blood coming back.  It should be dark blood, not bright red blood.  Bright red blood indicates that that’s the subclavian artery, which is not the target.
Q:	So is dark red blood... okay.  And if it comes back light blood, then you’re in the artery.  Is there any way that you might get light blood in the vein?
Tang:	Usually, it’s the other way around.  You can have darker blood in the artery, if the patient is inoxygenated for a while in an emergent situation, for example, then the arterial blood can look darker.
Q:	Okay.  So at this point do you know if you’re in the vein or not depending on the color of your blood or you’re making that assumption?
Tang:	If it’s dark, then you can assume that it’s in the vein.  And if the patient is not hypotensive.  If you have a good blood pressure, you can unscrew the syringe.  If it squirts at you, it’s probably arterial.  If it simply drips, then it’s venous.
Q:	What can you do if it’s bright red?  What’s your next step?
Tang:	Take the needle out.
Q:	And start over?
Tang:	Compress it.  Hold some pressure for a little while.
Tang:	Can I answer this page?
Tang:	Okay.  So I hit the vein and it’s dark blood, and when I take off the syringe from the needle, the blood is dripping and it’s not squirting at me, so I know it’s venous.  Next, I apply what’s called a Seldinger Technique.  So I use the wire that comes in the kit, and insert it through the needle.  So now if you can imagine the needle has a wire going through it, right?  And the needle’s fairly... I mean, the wire’s fairly long, so I insert a large portion of the wire inside leaving about this much out, so maybe about seven inches out.  Next, I remove the needle.  So now the only thing that’s in the patient is the wire, right?  And this whole time I’m looking at the monitor, I’m listening to the monitor, because the distal end of the wire as it goes in there’s a couple of directions it can go.  It can go into the heart, the direction of the heart or it can go into the neck.  It can backtrack into the internal jugular vein, which is not a big deal.  If it does goes into the heart, the patient will sometimes have arrhythmias, and so the alarms can tell you.  The alarms will go off if the patient is developing arrhythmias.  Then I just have to pull the needle back a little bit, so that it’s out of the heart itself.  Next, with the wire in place I use the knife and make a skin nick over the wire, so that when I use my dilator, the dilator can go in easily over the wire.  So the dilator goes over the wire, son now if you will, I have my vein, I have a wire sitting inside, and the dilator is going into the vein over the wire.  So the wire is guiding the direction of the dilator.  Next, after I made the dilation, I take out the dilator.  I get my central line.  In this case, it’s a triple-lumen, right?  Let’s just say that it’s a triple-lumen kit.  A triple-lumen kit has three ports, therefore the three... so there’s three holes along the length of the catheter also, each hole corresponds to a port.  There’s a blue and a white and a brown.  The brown port is the one that the wire threads through.  So I have to make sure the brown port is open, because there is a little locking mechanism that locks out the catheter itself, so that you can infuse fluid and (inaudible)... back out.  Okay?  So I have to make sure that brown port is open.  Now, with the skin having been dilator, the wire is still sitting inside the vein.  I thread the catheter over the wire, and watch it come out the catheter, and it should exit from the brown port.  Once it comes out of the brown port, I make sure I hold onto the wire, and advance the rest of the catheter into the patient.  And depending on the location, you know, there’s different lengths that I would insert the catheter.  And, lastly, I take out the wire.  So now the only thing that’s in the patient is the catheter.  Then I get a syringe with some saline in it and I’ll draw back on the catheter.  Make sure that the blood is flowing back easily, and then I’ll flush to make sure that the fluid goes back into the patient easily.  And then, lastly, I suture the catheter into the... onto the patient’s skin, and then apply a sterile dressing, and then I remove the drapes, put the patient in a comfortable position and get a chest x-ray.
Q:	If we can go back to when you made your incision with the knife, is there a certain way you need to do that or how do you make that opening?  Is there a specific...
Tang:	The way I do it, it’s... the knife is an eleven-blade, which means it’s a sharp tip.  Ten-blade is a round tip.  The one that comes in the kit is a sharp tip.  One side has the blade itself, the other side is blunt.  So what I do is I, essentially, use the blunt end, and I put it right next to the wire itself, and then I’ll make a stab incision.  So, essentially, I’m enlarging the skin, the skin around the area of the wire.
Q:	All right.  So you’ve attached the catheter, you sutured it in, and then you order the chest x-ray to verify the proper placement?
Tang:	A couple of reasons for the chest x-ray.  One is to make sure that it’s properly placed, it’s not into deep into the heart, it’s not going to the neck, because that’s another direction it can go, and also at the same time one of the complications with placing a subclavian catheter is you can hit the lung, and so you want to make sure that the patient doesn’t have apneumothorax.  That’s from a poached lung.
Q:	And would you only know that due to the chest x-ray?
Tang:	Not necessarily.  There are other ways of knowing, but for the most part, it’s not clinically apparent right away, because let’s say that you do make a hole in the lung from a needle stick, you didn’t hit the vein, you hit the lung itself.  What will happen is that the patient will start escaping air from the lung itself into the chest cavity.  If it’s a big leak, big hole, they’ll have a hard time breathing.  Their oxygen saturation may be low, but that usually does not happen right away.
Q:	Is a hemothorax (sic) the only risk factor if you’re doing subclavian?
Tang:	Apneumothorax?
Q:	Thank you.  Apneumothorax.
Tang:	Apneumo?
Q:	Apneumo.  Thank you.
Tang:	Apneumo.  Yeah.  Hemothorax is blood in the chest.  Hemo is air... pneumo is air.  No, when you’re doing a subclavian or an IJ, that carries a risk of apneumothorax as well.
Q:	So we’ve just completed a central venous catheter in the subclavicle (sic) area, and if we can, if we can go to the next preferred site, which if you have access to, I think it was, the internal jugular, and if we can go through the steps on that.  You...
Tang:	Sure, sure.  I’ll talk about the pertinent differences.
Q:	That would be great.
Tang:	And the difference between the IJ and the subclavian, it’s on the very beginning of the procedure.  Once the needle is in, everything else is the same.  Okay?  So the difference being, the patient would be, same thing, in a Trendelenberg position.  Now, if I’m doing, let’s say, the right side, I would have the patient turn his head to the left, so that I can have full exposure of the right side.  Now the standard of care for doing a (sic) internal jugular line is with ultrasound.  Before we didn’t use ultra sound, now we use an ultrasound.  So I make sure that the ultrasound is available, and that it’s also sterilized with a sterile drape.  The probe itself is not sterile, but we have a sterile drape that goes around it.  So I make sure that that’s all set up.  I would put the ultrasound probe, basically, near the head of the clavicle and march my way to the neck, and quickly enough I should be able identify two structures.  They both look like black coins on the ultrasound, I guess.  They’re both circular.  One should be larger than the other.  The larger one is usually the vein.  And a difference to... that can clue us into whether it’s an artery or a vein would be to compress with the ultrasound.  The vein is softer and when you put pressure to it should collapse versus the artery with, you know, a reasonable amount of pressure it shouldn’t collapse.  And if you look real closely you can actually watch the artery pulsate.  So that’s how you tell which one is which.  Now, next, once you have the vein isolated, I would put the probe... I would position the probe in such a way that the vein itself is directly in the center of the ultrasound screen.  Next, I would use the needle under ultrasound guidance, place it into the vein.  I can actually watch the needle go in, and once I have access into the vein everything else is the same.
Q:	And then for the femoral artery, if you don’t have access to the subclavicle (sic), you cannot do the internal jugular, then next is the femoral artery.  Is it the femoral vein or femoral artery?
Tang:	Femoral vein.
Q:	Femoral vein, excuse me.  Are the procedures the same?
Tang:	Very similar.  The only difference being the landmarks.  The landmarks for the groin being the anterior superior iliac spine, which is lateral and your pubic tubercle, which is medial.  The connecting... the imaginary line that you draw between these two structures is your inguinal ligament, and so the line that you place should be below the inguinal ligament, it should be below this imaginary line that you draw.  And for a patient who is now obese, you can usually feel the femoral arterial pulse by placing your hand over the groin, and the vein is just medial to the artery.  So your needle insertion site would be a little bit medial to where you feel the pulsation, maybe by a finger breadth.  That’s the only difference.
Q:	For the subclavicle (sic) you ordered a chest x-ray.  For the Internal jugular you had a...
Tang:	I would get a chest x-ray also.
Q:	You would get a chest x-ray for the femoral... okay.
Tang:	No, for the IJ I would.  For femoral I would not get an x-ray of any sort.
Q:	Okay.  So then verifying placement is done by?
Tang:	You know, if... the reason we get x-rays, for example, for the IJ and subclavian is because there’s a risk of apneumothorax, which, like I said before, it is usually not clinically apparent, but it will show up on a chest x-ray.  For the femoral, you’re in a groin, you’re far away, and there’s no risk of apneumothorax, and there should be, essentially, no risk to... very minimal risk rather, to damaging surrounding structures that can’t be picked up by an x-ray of any sort.  So it’s not useful.
KJ:	Do you use ultrasound to check it, the location or just go by the color of blood?
Tang:	No, some people do place femoral lines with an ultrasound, I don’t, but if you were to use it, it’s very similar to what I described for the internal jugular vein.  Again, you will find the two coin structures.  The artery is non-compressible, the vein is.  And it would be very similar to the IJ.
KJ:	Would you use ultrasound to confirm the location?
Tang:	No.  Once it’s in and I’m usually very certain that it’s in the vein.
Q:	Depending on the different site, is there a decision you make to use a cordis or a triple-lumen based on the subclavicle (sic), IJ or femoral area?
Tang:	No, because you can use the triple-lumen or the cordis for all six sites.
Q:	Is there a preference?  There’s no preference for either?
Tang:	Are you talking about location or the type of catheter?
Q:	The type of catheter, sorry.
Tang:	You know, the cordis, like I said, it’s used for large volume, quick resuscitation, because it’s a larger bore, and you can always place a triple-lumen catheter through a cordis.  So it’s more versatile.  You can always float... and you can float a Swan catheter, so it’s more versatile.
Q:	So you make that decision for you pick the location.  You already have in your mind you’re using a cordis or a triple, and then you choose a location.
Tang:	Exactly.
Q:	Okay.  Thank you.
KY:	Because you probably have to decide which kit you have, I guess.
Tang:	Right.
Q:	Who’s performing this procedure?  What’s the skill level of the person?  Is it your resident, is it a person in training?
Tang:	I think the junior residents should be able to perform it, but our hospital policy is that... you know, even for senior residents he has to be supervised, but definitely for junior residents he has to be supervised.
KY:	Junior residents being a second-year resident.
Tang:	First-year, I don’t see any reason why they shouldn’t do it, so first-year would be fine, second, third, and it also depends on the skill level of the particular resident you’re working with and the confidence that you have in them.
KY:	So the first time that they’re expected to learn this procedure is...
Tang:	As a first-year.
KY:	First-year resident, which is their second-year of post-med school.  Well, we always have this issue of it’s the first-year of your residency called an ‘internship,’ and then you’ve got first-year residency, which is the second- year.
Tang:	Right.
KY:	So straighten me out here.
Tang:	You’re right, it is confusing.  The first year out of medical school, you’re an intern.  You can also refer to them as first-year residents.
KY:	But a second-year resident is a second-year resident.
Tang:	Correct.
KY:	The second you’re out of school.
Tang:	That’s correct.
KY:	Even though the first year you might’ve been an intern, okay.  
Tang:	So it has different meanings.
KY:	Yeah, okay.  So the person who would be first exposed to this in their training would be a second-year resident?
Tang:	Would be a first-year resident.
KY:	A first-year resident.  Okay.
Tang:	They may not get to do a whole lot of it, but they definitely should be familiar with the steps.
KY:	So now your question about the prior knowledge.
Q:	Sure.
KY:	It’s not an easy question to formulate.  So is there anything that you’ve described that they would need to know, that they don’t already know, in order to perform the procedure?  And what I mean is that, they’ve done all the... they know what gowning and draping, they’ve done all that.  They should know what that is, otherwise they should go back to med school, know all the anatomical spots, they should all know.  They know what the kits are, the difference between the triple-lumen and cordis, they should know all that.  So is there anything that’s brand new to them, conceptually, equipment-wise or that’s not their location?
Tang:	No.  As far as the equipment, the anatomy, the procedure itself, none of this should be a new concept to whoever’s doing it for the first time.  However, going through the motions may be different, but as far as the concept of it, it should be information that they have already.
Q:	What about the process of deciding which side to gain access to, the process of, if I have access to this or if I don’t have access to this, then I’m going to go there?  Is that knowledge that the first- or second-year residents would know?
Tang:	It’s something that I expect them to know, but I wouldn’t be surprised if they don’t know.  Does that answer your question?
Q:	Yeah, it does.  Feel free to have a follow-up question.
KY:	No, no.
Q:	Okay.  Are there any major principles as part of the task, principles that are involved with the task that first-year residents or second-year residents would not know about prior to performing the task?
Tang:	No.  I think the problem that comes in is piecing all the information together and carrying out the procedure in a smooth fashion, but that comes with practice.
KY:	Why don’t you go to any problems and complications that concur.
Q:	Skip this one?
KY:	Yes, because I think we’ve pretty much, essentially, mode of information we pretty much covered all the way through.  You’ve got the color of the blood, and you’ve got...
Q:	The sound.
KY:	...sound.
Q:	Sound, okay.  During this procedure if there some maybe four or five or six problems that can go wrong, that the trainee should be able to solve, could you possibly go through what those are?
KY:	How they’d be able to solve them.
Q:	How they would be able to solve them.
Tang:	Sure.  One is, you can’t get access to the vein on your first two-three attempts.  The solution for that would be to go to a different site or use an ultrasound to look for the vein.  The second problem would be, for example, you hit the artery rather than the vein, and we talked about that before.  The treatment would be to take out the needle and hold compression for a little while.  It works well for the jugular and the femoral, but not very well for subclavian, because it’s in a non-compressible area.  Nonetheless, for the most part, the bleeding does not progress.  Other complications, you can get apneumothorax, like we talked about before.  Usually, it’s not clinically apparent, initially.  The chest x-ray would tell you how big the apneumothorax is, if it’s very big or if the patient is symptomatic, they’re short of breath, they’re uncomfortable, then the treatment would be... a couple different treatments.  One would be to place a chest tube, another treatment would be... we have these smaller catheters that can be placed anteriorly on the chest wall, that goes into the cavity, the lung thoracic cavity.  It’s not as uncomfortable as a chest tube.  So those can be done also.  If it’s a small apneumothorax we can elect to watch it by serial exams and serial chest x-rays, and watch it resolve, and put the patient on 100% oxygen.  Let’s see, other problems, we talked about when we were placing the catheter with a wire, you can get arrhythmias.  The solution for that is to pull out the catheter a little bit, so that it’s out of the right ventricle or the right atrium.  That’s the main problems I can think of.
KY:	You all good?
Q:	Thank you.
Tang:	Good questions.
Q:	Thank you very much.
Tang:	You’re welcome.
Q:	Thank you.
Q:	Yeah, thank you very much.
KY:	Thank you for your patience...
Tang:	No problem.
KY:	...and allowing everybody to learn to do this.
Tang:	All right.  All right, guys.  It was good meeting you guys.  All right.  Take care now.   All right.  Thank you so much. 
Q:	Thank you for kindness.
Tang:	No problem.  Thank you, guys.  Good luck.
