Maura:	Here we are with Dr. Kenji Inaba doing Central Line Placement Cognitive 
Task Analysis.
Joon Kim: 	Good morning.  I just wanted to explain to you a little bit about what we're 
doing today, also for your benefit, but probably more for mine.  So, today 
we're doing a Cognitive Task Analysis for Central Line Catheter 
Placement and so what we'll do is we'll get from you, the expert, on how 
you perform a central line placement and then we will use this for future 
training purposes.  So Dr. Inaba, what would you say is the objective and 
the reason or reasons for performing a central catheter placement.  
Dr. Inaba:	So the objective is to get a catheter into the central venous system as 
opposed to the peripheral circulation and the major, the two big reasons 
for doing that is'for the central lines that we're talking about because 
they have these long-lasting other (periphery access?) catheters'but for 
the ones that we're going to talk about today it's one, you can't get 
peripheral access.  That would be a major reason why we would use it 
and the other is to administer drugs or do monitoring, it needs to go 
directly into the central venous system.  So those would be the two big 
objectives. 
Joon Kim:	And are there any risks for performing a central'
Dr. Inaba:	Yeah, absolutely, there's a lot of short-term and long-term complications 
and (it goes?) with the site you choose for putting them in, but in general, 
the short-term things or complications or risks that I would explain to a 
patient would be for upper lines, for IJ or for subclavian, the risk of a 
pneumothorax, the risk of bleeding, the risk of inadvertently cannulating 
the arterial side rather than the venous side, and so all the vascular 
complications that can happen from that.  Physical damage to the area 
itself, the transection of the vein, hematoma in the soft tissues in that 
area.  And then we always use local for these so there's a risk of an 
allergic reaction to the (contrast?) so these are the short-term risks.  Long 
term, central venous catheterization, you can have long-term vessel 
problems so all the sort of complications with the vessel.  Big things would 
be infection and sepsis as a result of that and all of these other super low-
risk, there is a very small risk that someone could die from these, 
especially if it gets infected you can go back into sepsis and death.
Joon Kim:	So what would be some of the indications for deciding when you decide 
you want to perform'?
Dr. Inaba:	So the two big indications would be if you can't get peripheral IV access 
and you need access for the administration of fluids or drugs or whatever.  
Number two, the administration of things that need to go directly into the 
central circulation and so that would be things like vasopressor 
medications for example, or TPN for medium-term use, not super short-
term, because for super short-term you can do peripheral; for longer term 
you want something (in-dwelling?) so for an administering things like 
(inaudible)...  or for monitoring centrally, like a Swan Gans catheter has to 
be introduced centrally. 
Joon Kim:	And so on the flip-side of that, are there any contraindications for deciding 
not to perform?
Dr. Inaba:	Contraindications, well, if you can avoid it, you always want to avoid it.  So 
if you can do a peripheral, that would be a contraindication, if you need 
access, but other than that, no.  We can talk about site selection, because 
there's three big sites that we use, so I don't know if that's going to come 
up, but'
Maura:	I think we'll do that after do the task, let's get the task first.
Joon Kim:	Now, let's see, I had it worded a specific way.  Imagine you're writing a 
small, little pamphlet, very limited space, you have to break down this 
whole procedure into a few major chunks, what would those chunks be?
Dr. Inaba:	To do the procedure, you need to prep, so you need to get all your stuff 
ready.  So the preparation would be the first one and that would be 
preparation of stuff and preparation of the patient and some preparation 
of yourself.  Then, the next thing would be localizing the vessel, that 
would be the next big thing.  Then the next big segment would be 
insertion of the catheter, all the stuff, the wire, the needle, all that sort of 
stuff and the line, obviously, and then once that's done, securing 
everything and the last big section would be to confirm that it's adequately 
placed prior to using it.  
Joon Kim:	So please correct me if I'm wrong here, I have five steps and number one, 
prepare material and patient; number two, localize the vessel; number 
three, insertion of the catheter; number four is to secure the line and 
number five is to confirm placement.  
Dr. Inaba:	Yep.
Joon Kim:	Okay, great, thank you.  All right, we know that it's not that simple and 
these major steps also have many details, finer details, so starting with 
preparing the material and patient, you mentioned you have to first make 
a decision as to where.  So can you share with us a little bit about that 
decision that you make?

Dr. Inaba: 	Three big sites that we would use for central lines are femoral access site, 
subclavian vein and the internal jugular.  I think a big driving force behind 
what people are going to use is what they're comfortable with and what 
they have experience with.  So I think that's an important consideration, 
so if you put a hundred femoral lines in, although the benefits of the 
subclavian may outweigh it, if you feel more comfortable with that, 
especially in an emergency situation, that's going to play a big role.  If 
you're comfortable with everything though, the downsides to the femoral 
line are that it's an easily-infected area, so there's a much higher chance 
of catheter-related bloodstream infections and complications.  And for 
floating a Swan Gans catheter, it's much more difficult to do and for 
patient comfort, if they were to get up, it's not comfortable.  For the ICU 
patients hanging out, I think it's fine, but for everyone else it's very 
uncomfortable, an uncomfortable, dirty place and it's hard to do 
procedures through that line.  The other thing is if it's a hypotensive 
patient, you have to rely on'there's no bony landmarks, you have to rely 
on a pulse, the femoral artery, to landmark, so it can be hard, if they're 
really shockey, these are typically patients that you need it, it can be hard.  
Then the final reason why you might not want to do it is for (heart 
trauma?) patients, if there's an injury to any of the vasculature like an (IBC 
in route?) for example, your line's going to do you no good, because it's 
just going to dump fluid into the (retrocranial?) space and make it worse.  
It's not accessing your heart.  So those would be the negatives.  The 
positives of the femoral line, though, a lot of people feel very comfortable 
doing a femoral line, so that's a bonus and it's very superficial, so if you 
make a mistake or whatever, you can easily put pressure on it and it's not 
a big deal, at all.  So that would be some bonuses of femoral.  In general, 
though, we prefer'especially if you're comfortable with it'highlines or 
the subclavian or the IJ.  Now in choosing between those two, the IJ, first 
of all, I think is good because it is superficial so it also can be controlled 
with pressure, if you get it into the carotid, for example, by mistake or if it 
starts bleeding.  It's got a slightly higher risk of infection than the 
subclavian line, especially in our (RC?) patients, because of saliva and 
stuff dripping down onto the catheter.  It's a very comfortable line.  For our 
trauma patients, it's a negative, because almost all of our patients have 
the collar, C-spine collar on, so you can't use it because there's a collar 
blocking it.  Ultrasound guidance can be used to insert these lines in the 
neck, it's very easily visualized with ultrasound, so that can help guide it.  
But again, it does require the presence of a pulse in order to landmark, so 
it's much harder in a patient that's hypotensive but not as bad as the 
femoral line, because the pressure is usually better.  Subclavean is the 
final choice and it's a choice that on the trauma service, we almost always 
use.  It is the cleanest of all sites, it relies just on bony landmarks, so even 
in the most hypotensive patient, you can always have a pretty good go at 
getting your needle in and it's a very comfortable line for medium to 
longer-term use because it's not in your way, it's not bugging you when 
you sleep, that sort of stuff, so it's often used for that.  Although the 
infection rate is the lowest of all three of the sites and pneumothorax rate, 
although that's a very rare complication, is the highest of all three of the 
lines.  So for trauma patients, if you already have a pneumo on that side, 
it's fine you can put one in on that side and you're not going to get those 
complications.  So subclavian line is almost always the line that we would 
choose, because for our trauma patients you get rid of the risk of 
someone that has (an IVC injury?); it's clean, it's low risk of complications, 
low risk of infection.  It's comfortable for the patient and it's good with 
hypotensive patients.
Q:	So Dr. Inaba let me try and take a stab at this.  So it sounds like there's a 
decision that needs to be made as far as what site you're going to select.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep. 
Q:	The five big steps that you gave us, is that a task of its own or is it an 
action that follows them during one of these?
Dr. Inaba: 	It would probably be in prepping the patient, I guess, or it could be on its 
own, I guess, part of the whole sort of set-up, trying to decide where to go.  
And the other thing that would kind of help you decide where to go is if 
there's a bunch of stuff happening and let's say it's in an arrest on the 
floor or downstairs in the recess area and there's someone trying to 
intubate the patient and they're fully working up-top and so there's no 
room for you to work up there, then in that case, even if you suspect a 
venous injury down below, if there's just no space, because someone's 
putting a chest tube in on one side and someone's trying to'then a 
femoral line would be better.  
Q:	Does site selection precede preparing the patient?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, because you need to know'it's probably one of the first things that 
you do, because before you even'because for prepping the patient, you 
need to know where you're going to go, so I would say it definitely does.  
Q:	What are some other things that you may do in prepping the patient or 
prepping the equipment?
Dr. Inaba: 	The rest of the prep stuff?  So, for the patient, since we're on that I guess 
prepping the patient, if you can get consent, the first thing is to get 
consent, explain the risks and benefits and kind of go over all that sort of 
stuff.  You want to make sure that if there's no contraindication to it, 
putting a roll or something underneath the shoulder, especially for 
subclavian lines, will open that area up for you, so that's useful.  For the 
IJ, you're going to make sure that they're able to twist their neck over, so 
you just want to open up that area as much as possible for you.  And 
obviously, for femoral line it's just to get rid of clothing in that area, so 
nothing's obstructing your ability to put a line in.  And the rest of the 
patient prep is going to be once the kit's opened and stuff, but it's 
important that we completely prep the area, and do this as a super-sterile 
procedure because we know that that decreases our complication rate 
with catheter-related bloodstream infections, so they should be fully 
prepped as if this was a surgical procedure.  So that's skin cleansing and 
full prepping and draping of that area.  Same thing goes for prepping 
yourself, so both to protect yourself, which is important, but also in this 
case, unlike what we were talking about last week with a cric, which is an 
emergency procedure, in this case it's not.  I mean, it can be urgent, this 
could be emergent, too, but in any case, there's such a high infection rate, 
it's the main problem with catheters, you really want to make sure that you 
gown and protect both yourself as well as the patient from stuff that's on 
your hands.  Then for stuff, an assistant is very helpful, especially a non-
scrubbed assistant to hand you stuff and kind of get things ready for you.  
You need to have the central line kit, everything comes in a kit now, but 
outside of the kit, usually it's nice to have an extra syringe or two, like ten 
cc syringe or two; having a little bit of extra local around and having a little 
bit of extra prep around is good, so some of the things that aren't in the kit 
and having a nice set of towels so that you can really prep the area is 
much better than one single drape that's inside the kit.  External lighting 
can be very useful, for sure; having another kit that's unopened in the 
room.  When problems happen while you're putting the thing in and if the 
wire gets kinked, if you have to stop everything, take everything off, go 
find another kit, it's a total hassle and it just keeps that patient in the 
uncomfortable position for longer, the local can wear off, you may infect 
things, so always have another kit in the room.  You can just leave it 
closed, if you don't use it you don't have to open it up, so having that 
ready is good.  And then finally having whatever you're going to attach 
that to, so the line IV bag or whatever is good and having a little bit of 
extra saline around to flush the line is a good idea.  And the suture that 
comes in the kit, there's one suture and that may not be sufficient, so 
having an extra suture around is probably a good idea.  
Joon Kim:	So you've chosen your location, so you've assessed the situation, upper 
area is not available, you're going to go to femoral.  
Dr. Inaba:	Yep. 
Joon Kim:	You mentioned the kits, are the kits the same no matter where you go?
Dr. Inaba:	Yeah, you know, it's going to be hospital-dependent, but in general, 
there's good data to support whichever company you decide to'your 
hospital purchases them from for longer-term use, so basically lines that 
aren't just put in for an operation.  Like when anesthesia puts a line in, it 
can be short-term but anything where you think it's going to stay for more 
than twenty-four hours, it should be an antibiotic-coated catheter.  So 
virtually all of them being stocked now are antibiotic-coated so there's 
good evidence for that.  Within the lines themselves, there are a couple of 
big sort of types of lines and the types of lines are the single, double, 
triple, quad, lumen-type catheters, so there's skinny catheters and then 
there's the thick ones, which are almost always called a percutaneous 
introducer or some people refer to it as a Cordis, which is the first 
company that used to make these a long time ago, but it's a misnomer, 
it's a percutaneous introducer and then there's the other ones.  There's 
lines called (MAC lines or Y lines?) or a bunch of lines like that, there's 
dialysis catheters, there's a bunch of miscellaneous.  But for the purposes 
of this, the big two that one would teach is the single, double, triple, 
quads, the skinny ones and then the percutaneous introducers.  And to 
choose between those, the skinny catheters are the catheters that you 
would use in an elective sort of situation and you need it because there's 
no peripheral access, for example, and it's a thin line, it's very slow to run 
stuff through, it's a pretty stable line but you can't run big lines through 
there and so it's the sort of thing, they're in the ICU, there's no peripheral 
access and you need four different channels to infuse TPN this and that 
and that sort of stuff, so that's what that would be used for.  The 
percutaneous introducer which is shaped like an L is a single lumen, it's 
big, in fact it's bigger than the biggest of the multi-lumen  catheters but it 
only has a single port, so you can ram a bunch of fluid through very quick.  
So we would use that as a resuscitation line, so in the emergency room 
we never put in those multi-lumen catheters, we just use this 
percutaneous introducer and also, up in the ICU if you want to do any 
instrumentation through it, so PA catheter, that needs to go through a 
percutaneous introducer, you can't do it through the multi-lumen  
catheters.  So the big drawback of the percutaneous introducer is that you 
only have one channel, but on the flip-side, you can put a lot of fluid 
through there and you can put a PA catheter through there.  And if you 
need more lumens you can put a quad, triple, double or single through the 
back part of the percutaneous introducer so it kind of meets inside, so you 
actually can put more lines in.  So that's the difference between the two, 
those are the two big sorts of sets of lines that we would choose to use.  
Joon Kim:	So it sounds a lot like the situation would dictate which one to use, rather  
than the actual site.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Right, the site wouldn't dictate it, it wouldn't be  user preference, it would 
purely be the practically what you need the line for.  
Maura:	Any other parts of task one, preparing yourself, your person and your 
stuff?  
Dr. Inaba: 	No.  
Maura:	What are some of the routine problems that occur with this task one?
Dr. Inaba: 	With the first part?  The routine problems'
Maura:	Or where learners kind of fall down or make a mistake.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Not having the stuff ready.  I think, you know, the big battle of all of 
surgical everything is being prepared and in order to be prepared, you 
need to have done it a bunch of times so that you know what you're going 
to end up running into as problems.  So having an extra kit in the room is 
huge.  You're always walking by and someone's looking, they're all 
scrubbed and clean and they can't go and find another box, but they 
clearly need it.  So they're trying to persist with this broken wire, which is 
totally dangerous, so any preparation is a key sort of thing, but other than 
that, the prep part is not where most complications occur.  
Joon Kim:	All the material is placed there by somebody else?
Dr. Inaba: 	Inside the kit.  
Joon Kim:	No, like all the materials'
Dr. Inaba: 	I think it's super important that the user, whoever is going to perform the 
procedure be responsible for getting all that stuff.  Not the nurse, not the 
med student, yeah, I think the person that's going to be doing it, I think it's 
very important.  
Joon Kim:	If the wire breaks, then you switch to a new wire?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, or it usually gets kinked, it's super hard to break the wire, but people 
have done it, unfortunately.  So, yeah, you can switch that, that's why it's 
nice to have another kit in the room and an assistant that can open that kit 
for you.  It's not uncommon for that to happen.  
Maura:	So task two, localizing the vessel, so let's drill-down, what are some of the 
steps and decisions of that?
Dr. Inaba: 	Okay, so for localizing the vessel, it depends on the site, of course.  So 
should we just pick one?
Maura:	I'd pick one and then we'll go back to the other two and you can describe 
how those two are different.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Okay, so for the subclavian, it's all bony landmarks and basically, you 
need to identify the anatomy of the clavicle.  You want to prep that whole 
area as wide as possible, so you have a lot of space, so you can see the 
stuff above, to the sides and below it.  Basically, you just have to picture in 
your mind that the subclavian vein is running beneath the clavicle and 
you're going to start off where the clavicle takes a little jog upwards, so 
that two-thirds of the way from the sternum outwards and everyone's 
clavicle takes a little bit of a turn there, most people's do.  There, you just 
want to drop down a centimeter or two, because that's where the needle 
is going to go in.  For localizing the vessel, I think most of us, if it's an 
emergency situation, we can skip the local stuff, but if it's an elective 
situation, you want to make it as comfortable as possible for the patient.  
So I would take a ten cc syringe with local with lidocaine in it, which 
there's only a small amount in the kit, so you might want to draw a little bit 
more up.  So you start off with the lidocaine in a very thin needle that's 
already in the kit and you use that needle to try to localize the vessel.  So 
you would start out with the skin, localize the skin and anesthetize the skin 
and then pop through and then just slightly go forward, draw back to make 
sure that you're not getting blood and then push some local in and let that 
infuse for a second and just kind of do that drawing back, infuse, drawing 
back, infuse.  It's pretty quick.  You're aiming for a spot just underneath 
the clavicle where the vein is sitting and you're trying to get that local 
needle directly into that and you should see a nice drawback of venous 
blood or darker sort of blood coming into your needle.  And once you've 
done that, you know that you have a (tract?) you know about where it's 
sitting and you know it's in the right spot, there's no anomaly there and 
there should be a nice path of local anesthetic on the way to their vein.  
Then you can just pull that out and some people talk about leaving it in, 
but I don't do that, I just pull the needle right back out and then you can go 
to the big needle, which depending on which kit you use, it will come in 
different colors, but that's the actual one that you're going to start the 
whole process of insertion.  So localization will probably end there, so 
trying to get access.  You may not get to that area, you may do all the 
infusing and the local and not actually get your needle into the vessel and 
localize it, but that's okay, because then you can pull the local needle out 
and go to your big needle, which is the one that you're actually going to 
do the whole procedure through and you can use that to localize your 
vessel.  
Maura:	So you said some people leave the needle in, but you pull it out?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, just kind of like as a guide or whatever, you can kind of theoretically 
follow the side, but I never found that to help.  So, I know some of the 
people that interview me say that, but'
Maura:	Okay, so you can do it either way.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah. 
Maura:	So what about the femoral site versus the IJ site?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, the nice thing about the subclavian is the bony landmarks, but with 
the femoral site and with the IJ site, your goal is to feel the pulse.  So 
again, same principles, prep widely so you can see everything, you want 
to see as much as possible.  With the femoral, it's very important that you 
stay below the (Ingman ligament?) and one little pitfall is when guys go 
too high, then your ability to compress the area is lost and the ability for 
the vein, if you tear it, to bleed is much higher if you go above the Ingman 
ligament.  So it's important to stay below in the leg area of the groin.  Like 
I said, a (meter?) or two, below the Ingman ligament, but definitely on the 
lower side and that way if something goes wrong, it's totally easy to just 
compress it.  And your goal is to stay below the Ingman ligament, feel for 
the pulse, go medial to that and work your way away from the artery, from 
the pulse.  So you usually have one finger on the pulse and you're a 
centimeter or so below and just start below and again, with the local 
needle, because it's just easier to do, it's more comfortable for the patient, 
find the vessel that way and then you can move to your big needle.  With 
the neck, same thing, except you're going to go lateral, obviously, from 
the carotid pulse and you want to move from lateral inwards towards your 
carotid, which is going to be sitting under your finger.  Now, the new 
standard will probably be to use ultrasound to help you localize. I don't 
use ultrasound, but a lot of our new fellows will be and I bet you some 
people will describe using ultrasound.  And again, halfway down the neck 
area, so it's in a comfortable spot and you have to kind of judge, 
everyone's neck's a little bit different, but in a comfortable spot, because 
that's where your line is going to be hanging out.  You don't want it too 
high, because it's going to be very uncomfortable and obviously you don't 
want it too low to the neck.  So about halfway up would be a good starting 
spot and for both the femoral and for the IJ, the key is to use your left 
hand if you're a right hand sort of guide and to go with the pulse.  One 
other thing I didn't mention was that, although for the IJ and for the 
femoral, it doesn't matter as much probably, for almost all right-handed 
people, doing lines on the patient's right side is ergonomically almost 
always easiest.  For a left-handed person, opposite, just because of the 
way your arms slight, so almost always it's ergonomically easiest.  The 
time that you wouldn't do that is for high lines, especially for subclavians,  
but also for IJ's, if they already had a traumatic pneumo or they have a 
chest tube on the left side, you know that you can't make things worse, so 
you should always go on that side, that's what we would counsel.  If it's a 
gunshot wound to the left side or something where there may be trauma 
to the arterial side or the venous side of that side, go to the other side.  So 
those would be the two big exceptions, but otherwise, just ergonomically 
it's easier on a patient's right.  
Maura:	So that was task two and you described three sites, so briefly for each 
site, can you describe what would be a routine problem or where would 
learners run into trouble?
Dr. Inaba:	So I would say for the subclavian, a routine problem or a pitfall or 
something that can go wrong'for the subclavian specifically, one thing 
that is important to teach is, it used to be taught or it still is sometimes, 
probably, that once you are going through, you hit the clavicle, you know 
the vessel is underneath, if you hit the clavicle people used to say, or 
people still do, that you go through, you hit the clavicle, just pull back a 
little bit and push all the soft tissues down and then you're going to find 
the vessel right underneath, which is fine, when you use that nice, strong, 
steel needle.  So you push forward up, you hit the clavicle, you just pop 
back a little bit, go down and hit the vein.  The needle is strong enough 
that it will be able to push all that soft tissue down and let you find and get 
into the vein and then you do the rest of your stuff.  But when you actually 
put the soft catheter in, that catheter is going to come through and it's 
going to take a wicked S-turn as it comes down through that'because 
soft tissue is going to push the catheter right back up, especially the multi 
lumen  catheters.  So it's just going to go in, it's going to come through 
and then go and it's going to be it, so the chest X-rays that you see with 
that wicked S happening, that's not good because those are the catheters 
that don't drawback well, because they're kinked and they're very soft 
catheters and flow rate is bad through those and the ability to draw back 
are bad.  So rather than doing that, we always recommend that you pull 
the needle all the way back up and then change your angle a little bit and 
then come back in, so that you have a nice straight line trajectory.  So on 
your X-ray, you see that nice smooth entry into the vessel and that way 
you don't get the kinking and all the line problems which is a real hassle 
for nursing afterwards.  For the femoral and for the IJ, I think the big pitfall 
is getting into the carotid or into the femoral artery by mistake, so I think 
the important thing is as soon as you enter with the actual needle, and 
we'll go to that in the next step, the syringe is actually going to come off 
and you're going to watch the blood drip out of there.  It is essential at that 
point, to identify are you in the arterial side or in the venous side and it is 
very clear.  Venous bleed, if you're in the vein, it should be nice, slow 
dripping of dark venous blood and not pulsatile arterial, bright red blood.  
If you see that pulsatile, arterial red blood, it's not a big deal, in any of the 
three sites, you just pull that needle out, hold some pressure there for a 
couple minutes and then you can just try again, on that same side, without 
re-prepping, without getting anything at all.  The problem is if you don't 
recognize that and then you put the dilator in and then you put this big line 
in, then that's a problem, because then you have a big hole in the artery 
and that can be dealt with just by leaving that there and then under 
interventional radiology if they're a sick, (inaudible)...  patient we can take 
it out while visualizing and we actually have percutaneous stoppers that 
we can put in.  So it's not a big deal in the big picture, but for every patient 
it is a big deal, because it's another procedure and more contrast.  So that 
would be a pitfall that needs to be recognized at the time.  Now, 
anesthesiologists have the luxury of sticking'and sometimes in the ICU, 
we do as well, stick in our A-line transducer to it, so if you're kind of 
unsure, you can just plug that in and you can tell if it's an arterial pressure 
wave and arterial pressures then you know you're in the artery and you 
just pull it out and you're done.  But almost always we don't have that 
luxury, so I'll just tell people that's something where you need to take a 
look to make sure that you're in fact in venous bleeding.  If you're unsure, 
the safest thing is to pull it out and do it again.  If you get that again and 
you're unsure, set up a pressure transducer because you just want to 
avoid for the poor patient to have to go through all the things if you get a 
complication.  So that would be a big negative from those. 
Maura:	Any questions for Dr. Inaba for task two?
Q:	Yeah, thank you.  So you're in the vein and do you take the needle out?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep. 
Q:	And you're looking at the blood coming out and it's the way you described 
it is dripping is venous and pulsating squirting blood is arterial.  But you 
also indicated that you could possibly make a mistake, so what are some 
indications that you don't recognize it that you made a mistake. 
Dr. Inaba: 	Oh, that you've'?
Q:	Hit an artery. 
Dr. Inaba: 	Hit an artery, the biggest thing that you are going to look for if you hit the 
artery is it's going to be bright red blood and it's going to be pulsatile.  It's 
going to be squirt, squirt, it's going to be very noticeable.  It doesn't 
happen often, and that's a judgment thing, skill thing, experience thing, I 
think, and that's one of the things that you learn, I guess, but that's 
specifically what you're looking for.  And venous bleeding is it's dark and it 
just drips out, it flows out.  So that's the big difference, I think.  
Maura:	Task three, I think, is going to be the biggest one.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, it's the actual catheter.  So for that, it's all the same regardless of the 
three sites, once you get in with your big needle, we always recommend 
that as soon as you get in, go in just like a millimeter or so further, 
because if just the tip of the bevel needle gets in and you have a little bit 
of blood coming through, that's totally fine for the blood working its way 
through, but then everything else, the wiring, the dilation, all the 
subsequent steps aren't going to work very well and you can tear the 
vessel.  So once you get in, go in just another millimeter or so to make 
sure that your needle is fully within the vessel and as soon as you're in 
you'll see'because you're going to go in with the needle under suction 
like we were talking about, because you go in under suction, give a little 
local, whatever, the needle is always under suction and so you should get 
a nice drawback of easy pull, dark venous blood.  Then you take that 
syringe off and you should see nice venous dark blood just dripping out 
and at this point, there should be enough venous pressure that you can't 
suck air in, so you can just relax at this point and let that blood drip out.  
And there's going to be a little pool of blood, but that's okay.  At this point, 
the critical maneuver is for most right-handed people it's your left hand, 
you're going to just hold on to the hub of that needle, because now this is 
where the needle can just pop out or go through or whatever and you 
want it to stay as still as possible.  Everything's already set up, your kit is 
open and everything's ready to go.  Your next step is take the wire, the 
guide wire and feed that through the needle and until you get that wire 
nicely into the thing, a lot can go wrong, in that you can lose that spot.  If 
you do, it's not a big deal, if the wire doesn't go through, it means that you 
slipped out of the vessel.  You just have to put the wire aside, get your 
syringe back on and try to find it again, so it's not a big deal, but if you 
hold it nice and still, that's when you can just feed the wire in and you're 
good to go.  Because once that wire is in, you're set, because the channel 
from skin through the inside of the vessel is made.  The wires are going to 
be long, you do not need to put the whole wire in, in fact, if you put the 
whole wire in, it's going to snake it's way into the RV, into the atria and 
you have a chance of arrhythmias.  People are always paranoid about the 
wire not being in far enough, but really, especially for the IJ and the 
femoral, it just needs to go in the length of your needle and a little bit past 
that, which is not very long at all.  So there should be a good amount of 
wiring hanging, you just have to feed enough in so that your needle is 
covered and a little bit more, because then it's fully inside the vessel.  And 
the reason why they make it so long is so that at one point where it has to 
be long is when the catheter is being fed onto the wire and the tip of the 
catheter is at the skin, so it has to be at least as long as that whole cath 
and that's why it's made so long.  Once your wire is in and the needle is 
in, you're safe.  We recommend that you make a little cut on top of the 
needle at that point in the skin, because that's what's going to hang you 
up from putting all the next steps in the dilator and the line.  And we 
recommend cutting out a needle, because theoretically you could cut the 
wire so I know it's a very small risk, but you can just cut on a needle and 
that way it's a nice rigid thing.  The incision is just a couple millimeters but 
it has to be wide enough and you want to make sure there's no skin 
bridge between the needle and the cut, so that the cut is right on top of 
the wire, otherwise you're doing no good to the patient.  So it has to be 
cut right onto the needle and then you can pull the needle out and 
depending on what you put in, if you're putting a percutaneous introducer 
in, the introducer and the dilator are together, pre-loaded as one.  If you're 
putting the multi lumen catheter in, you do the dilator first, pull that out and 
then put the catheter in.  The dilator is just about this long, it's a rigid 
plastic thing that dilates the tract and the skin up a little bit.  With the 
precutaneous introducer, you put the dilator into the precutaneous 
introducer before you do this, so it all goes in as one, otherwise the 
precutaneous introducer won't smoothly slide through, because it's got a 
pretty big opening.  
Maura:	So what you just described is the same for all three sites, the only 
difference is the landmarks.
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, exactly.  You cut the skin and then you dilate and then pull the dilator 
out and put the multi lumen in or you put the whole percutaneous 
introducer in, all together.  
Q:	So for the Cordis, it's just one you put together outside the body, that was 
one'
Dr. Inaba: 	Exactly and then you pull the wire, the dilator out, for the multi lumen . 
Q:	Okay, now I'm confused because it kind of seems like for the Cordis, you 
put the dilator in there and then you (inaudible)... [OVERTALKING] then 
you take the wire up and how do you take the dilator'?
Dr. Inaba: 	Because the dilator goes in it from behind.  
Q:	It goes in from behind, okay. 
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, so it's shaped like an L, this is where the fluid comes out, this is 
where you infuse and in the back there's a one-way valve here, a rubber 
valve and you put the dilator through that valve this way and then that all 
goes in and so now the wire is sticking out of here and you can pull the 
dilator and the wire out from behind.  With the multi lumen catheter, if it's 
a single, it's easy, but with a multi lumen it's always the central channel or 
the brown channel, there's different colored caps.  The brown channel 
would be the channel that's the main central channel and so before you 
put the wire in, you have to take the cap off of that, otherwise the wire's 
not going to come through.  So you've got to undo that and you know, 
there's a little bit of controversy over whether or not we should be 
prepping these catheters with fluid to prevent a theoretic air embolus and 
we know that the venous pressure in virtually everybody is going to be 
above zero, so whenever you put a line in, you put this nice saline in to 
prime the line and then the blood just pushes the saline out, because 
there's nothing that's being sucked in, so some people do, some people 
don't.  Almost all of our lines are very urgent or emergent, so we don't 
bother doing that, but some people, as you do this, may say that and I 
think it's fine if you have time.  I think it's fine, but the brown line should be 
uncapped so that the wire can come out.  And the other thing to 
remember, I think, as a teaching point is to never let go of the wire.  So 
once the dilator goes in for the multi lumen catheters, so you're holding on 
to the wire here, you push the dilator over top, grab the wire on this end 
because almost always, people jam the wire in too far, pull the wire out a 
little bit while the dilator's in, so that you can capture the wire on this side 
and then push the dilator in, never let go of the wire.  Like here, at L.A. 
County over the last six months, we've embulized four wires.  It's 
something that should never happen, it's a zero tolerance, it just should 
never happen and it's happened four times here, in one hospital in six 
months.  So that's why we always want to reemphasize that you never, 
ever let go of the wire, because it can get embulized.  You can get it out, 
but it's a major deal.  
Maura:	So say you're putting the guide wire in and you can't get it in because 
you've lost your spot, so you pull the guide wire and you start again, can 
you put that same guide wire back in?
Dr. Inaba: 	Totally.  It won't be nicely in your little round (inaudible)... 
[OVERTALKING]  thing, but it's totally fine.  
Maura:	You don't have to go get a new wire.  
Dr. Inaba: 	It's totally fine.  One thing, if you are going to put it back in, for teaching 
purposes there's a soft end, like if you actually pull the wire out and hold it 
up like this, there's an end that's rigid, it's sticking out one way and the 
other end will just kind of flop over a little bit and that soft end should be 
the soft end that goes into the vessel, so it won't poke in and pop through, 
so for teaching purposes.  And in an emergency situation we actually 
want the rigid wire, so we'll just flip it around and put the hard end in, but 
you should never do that, it's against the'  So for the teaching thing, you 
always pick the soft end, which it always comes pre-loaded with the soft 
end up.  Theoretically, that's what should be done.  
Maura:	And then you said you put your needle in and you put your wire a little bit 
past the needle.  So when you say a little bit past'
Dr. Inaba: 	Eh, ten centimeters, five centimeters, five to ten centimeters.  
Maura:	Other questions about task three?
Q:	The brown port seems particularly more structured than the other parts, 
but you want to open the brown port, is there a specific reason why you're 
using the brown port?
Dr. Inaba: 	Just because it's a central one.  If it's a single lumen catheter, you just 
undo that, whatever port it is, but if it's a triple lumen there's going to be 
the blue part and then there's a little joint and there's three little things 
hanging out and one of the caps is white, one is brown, one is red, 
maybe, I can't remember or yellow, blue, maybe it's blue.  Whatever color 
is it, the brown one is the central main line, so that's the one that goes all 
the way through and is where your wire is going to come out and the other 
ports have little offshoots, so that they can infuse and draw blood out 
through those, but it's not the direct channel.  So the wire is going to want 
to come out the major port. 
Maura:	So what about routine problems during that task?
Dr. Inaba: 	The wire issue is a major issue, if the wire gets caught, it happens all the 
time.  So if the wire can't go in, first of all, it means that your needle's 
come out, do not force it because you're just trying to ram the wire 
through soft tissues and it will always go wrong.  Take it out and get a 
nice, clean pull of blood and then re-feed the wire.  When you're trying to 
pull the wire out, if it gets stuck'and that happens, too, like it's gotten 
caught on the sharp bevel of the needle, that's a pain'if you persist, 
you're going to shred the wire and you're going to embulize a bit of the 
wire, so just pull the whole thing out.  That's common, not an uncommon 
problem where people get into trouble, so instead of shredding the wire, 
pull the whole thing out and don't persist on that side, because chances 
are you've already caused a bit of an opening in that vein.  Go to the other 
side, if they really need a line.  What else?  That cut, sometimes you 
leave a little skin bridge between your needle hole and your cut, so that 
you're trying to'the thing that always hangs up any insertion of anything 
is the skin, because it's so strong.  So you're just pushing and pushing 
and you can't get through, it means that you left a little bridge of skin, so 
all you have to do is really cut down on it to make sure that you cut that 
skin bridge.  That's about it.  Losing the wire would be'I guess it 
happens, I've never seen it.  I saw one X-ray when I was a med student 
once of a wire that was coiled up in someone's heart and you know, I 
never, ever heard of it happening until I came here, so'four times.  
Maura:	Hence the reason we're doing the CTA and developing the whole 
curriculum for somebody.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, I guess it happens, so, yeah.  
Joon Kim:	You mentioned earlier that most everyone has positive blood flow, is there 
any chance of someone to have negative blood flow and'?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, probably, but there's always going to be a push outward, but 
theoretically when they breathe in, I suppose you could'but practically, 
yeah, if you always tell people to prime the lines beforehand, I think it's 
the safest thing.  I mean, there's not a lot of air in there, but I think there's 
theoretically which could cause an air embolus, but'
Q:	Would priming lines be part of the preparation or'?
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah.  I don't do it, but for teaching purposes, you could say that. 
Q:	It can be done.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, it can be done.  
Maura:	Okay, so task four is securing the lines.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, and once you pull the wire and all that sort of stuff, at that point, I 
guess'I don't know what part this would fit in, you guys can sort of 
guess, but the blood will immediately come up to the catheter, as soon as 
you take the wire and stuff out, the venous pressure will push it back up, 
you can just touch the syringe, whether it's Cordis or the brown cap line, 
just pull on it to make sure you get nice, clean good flow of blood back 
and then we have that saline that we were talking about just sitting there 
and we can reinject saline back in, so the line doesn't have blood clotting 
in it.  Just put saline in it and you can just cap it off.  And then for the other 
two lines or three lines or whatever, you can just pull back to get blood to 
come up and you should see nice flow and then reinfuse saline, cap it off, 
then it's a full saline-contained thing.  So for securing the line, while 
everything is still clean and sterile, I think it's important to suture the line in 
place.  These kits all come with these clips, but they don't work well and 
so we recommend sewing it in in two places, at least.  Each of the 
needles has a little sort of thing on it that you can actually sew to the skin, 
so we should definitely do that.  Then after that is done, then you need to 
put an occlusive dressing on top of it and there is some evidence now that 
we should be using an antibiotic-coated disc right on the insertion site and 
that decreases your cath-related bloodstream infection rate.  So you can 
put an antibiotic-coated little mini dressing and then a (tecaderm?) or a 
plastic occlusive dressing on top of that.  So that's securing the line, it's 
very important, so probably put an antibiotic-coated dressing on there and 
then an occlusive dressing on there. 
Maura:	Any routine problems with that?
Dr. Inaba: 	Nope, pretty straight forward.  
Maura:	So last task, confirm adequate placement.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, chest X-ray, for femoral line, really nothing, just your confirmation is 
going to be pulling blood out so you get a drawback and you can infuse 
saline back in.  For high lines, though, we should always get a chest X-ray 
which is going to confirm that it's sitting in the SBC outside of the right 
atrium.  So you'll see it sitting in the proper spot, you should get that and 
at the same time it's going to tell you if you've got a pneumo or some 
other complications.  It's not common, but I think it's good practice.  So 
yeah, just to confirm that it's sitting in the right spot, that it's not going up 
into the neck, like a subclavian can go upwards instead of downwards, for 
example.  So that sort of thing and complications and it's important to do 
that, unless it's an emergency, before you use the line, just because it's 
just a safety principle, so always do that.  And then the final thing as part 
of that is to do a count of all the stuff, especially the wire, to make sure 
you still have that wire.  So that's a new thing that we do now, we never 
used to do that, but I never thought it was possible to leave a wire, but 
apparently you can.  
Maura:	Did a new checklist come out, does the hospital have a new checklist?  
Dr. Inaba: 	Probably.  
Maura:	I know (Nick Name?) was working on something, so I can probably grab it 
and it would be helpful for this.  What else do you guys want to ask Dr. 
Inaba?
Q:	Would you confirm with X-rays for all three sites or just with the IJs?
Dr. Inaba: 	Nope, just IJ's.  
Q:	Then for the femoral how would you confirm?
Dr. Inaba: 	Just aspiration, exactly, but again, we really try to avoid femoral lines, 
really try to avoid them.  They just get infected all the time. 
Joon Kim:	Who does this procedure?  
Dr. Inaba: 	Who does the procedure.  That is a good question.  It depends on where 
you work.  Our new rule is that you need to be credentialed in that 
procedure, so all our residents go through the central line course at the 
skills center and throughout their training they get observed by someone 
that's credentialed and so generally, here, any of our fellows, any of the 
attending surgeons would be'it's just like any procedure that we do.  All 
our residents are watched and that would be the official answer.  If it's an 
emergency, almost always in an emergency, there's an attending there, 
but it's done mostly by residents, watched by an attending.  
Maura:	I know the answer to this question, but I'm going to ask it anyway, 
because we're supposed to.  Are there any new terminology or what you 
just described to us, the residents would know what you're talking about.  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep, absolutely. 
Maura:	Is there anything that they wouldn't know or understand? 
Dr. Inaba: 	No.  I hope not.  
Maura:	We talked about conditions, already, we talked about equipment and 
materials, performance objectives.  So, how do you know you've 
successfully placed a line?  You kind of covered this in bits and pieces.
Dr. Inaba: 	I guess you would know that you're in the right spot or you did a good job 
in this procedure?
Maura:	You're done.  You're walking away and you're confident that that's 
exactly'
Dr. Inaba: 	Okay, so you would know that you got good aspiration, you were able to 
infuse and lock all the ports with saline and got a chest X-ray that showed 
you're in the right spot and the patient is alive, happy, yeah, aspirations, 
infusion, chest X-ray confirmation.  Those would be the big things. 
Q:	Are there any sensory cues you rely on?  I'm sure there's some sort of 
tactile or any smells or anything like that?
Dr. Inaba: 	No smells, but definitely as you're going in, that pull of blood, because 
when you're going in with the syringe on suction and you hit the vein and 
it suddenly, that's a very tactile feel.  Feeding the wire smoothly, the 
smooth flow of the wire is a tactile thing that is important.  When the wire 
doesn't come up and gets stuck, that's important.  When the line goes in, 
it should also go in nice and smoothly, it shouldn't be hard to push in.  
Maura:	Do you guys  have anything else to ask?
Joon Kim:	Are there any prior tasks that needs to be completed before performing a 
central line?
Dr. Inaba: 	Like what?
Joon Kim:	Is there any prerequisite, like stuff that needs to be done before? 
Dr. Inaba: 	No, just administratively, we ask them to go through a teaching session 
on it, but practically, no.  One other thing that they can do to learn all the 
steps is (wiring a line?) and that's when you have a person who already 
has a line in, but you're worried that it's infected and you want to send a 
bit of it off for a culture or there's some other complication with the line, so 
that instead of doing all the insertion stuff, all they do is they prep it, they 
put a wire in, take the old line out and put a new one in, so you get used 
to all the steps in the field and that sort of stuff.  So that's helpful, if 
they've wired some lines, in fact, with our med students, we try to get 
them into wire lines first, so that they get all the bits and pieces figured out 
before they do the actual puncture, because that takes the most'the 
hardest part to try to find.
Joon Kim:	Probably because there's a lot of fear'
Dr. Inaba: 	Yeah, that you're going to do some damage.  
Maura:	What about removal?  How do you know when you're ready to take the 
line out?  
Dr. Inaba: 	The rule is that as soon as it can come out, you should get it out.  So the 
moment you don't need it and in fact, you have a daily assessment of 
invasive devices in our ICU and so every day we ask the question, can 
that line come out?  Yes or no, are we using it?  And if the answer is we're 
not using it, it comes out immediately.  So, yep, I think the answer would 
be as soon as you can get it out, you should get it out.  
Joon Kim:	And who makes that call? 
Dr. Inaba: 	Our residents, fellows, attendings.  
Joon Kim:	So if they don't need large-volume resuscitation, then you can take it out. 
Dr. Inaba: 	Or if they need large-volume resuscitation and you can get a peripheral IV 
on them, we always try every day, because it's always better to have a 
peripheral IV, always, always better.  
Maura:	Then just the steps of removing the line, just walk us through them.  
Dr. Inaba: 	To remove a line, it's very straightforward, actually, all you do is pull the 
tape off and then snip the stitch and you don't need to leave the stitch in 
place and there's no stitching of anything, so you need to make sure if 
there's any little round stitch in the skin, you can get rid of that and then 
it's simple really, you pull it out, and it's important you don't splash 
yourself, because when it comes out there's going to be blood on the end.  
It could be infected, so you want to make sure that you don't get splashed 
and that gets disposed of.  Some places routinely culture the lines, we 
don't do that.  If it's coming out because you're worried that it's infected a 
little bit of it can be sent off, otherwise the dressing goes on there and 
that's it.  You can put some pressure on it for a couple minutes, but it's 
totally not necessary. 
Q:	So if it's infected or if there's no use for the line, they're going to remove 
the line. 	  
Dr. Inaba: 	Yep.  If it's not working, yeah.  
Maura:	Great, any last questions?  
Joon Kim:	During the whole procedure, you have a resident that's doing it, is there 
any point where they come across a complication that they might not 
know what to do or they should know what to do.  
Dr. Inaba: 	I mean, if it's their first time and the wire gets'it depends, if they had 
teaching from you guys, but they may not, they might be persisting, trying 
to yank out a wire through the needle and preserve it.  They may hit 
arterial bleeding and don't know what to do, I suppose there's spots, 
definitely spots.  Especially if an intern's putting one in, probably more 
important that someone's watching.  
Maura:	Thank you Dr. Inaba.  
[END OF INTERVIEW]


