Q: 	We’re here with Dr. Howard Belzberg.  The date is June 2nd, 2009.  So we’re going to do a Cognitive Task Analysis and I explained to you kind of what our kind of process is.  So can you just tell us what the terminal objective of central venous catheter placement is?  What’s your ultimate goal when you do that procedure?
Belzberg:	Well, it’s interesting.  It’s an interesting question, because there’s several goals, and they can be divided largely into two major areas.  One is venous access to provide fluids and drugs, and the other is access to the central circulation to allow for hemodynamic monitoring.
Q:	Can you briefly describe to me the components of the procedures?  So say we were like in an elevator and I said, “Hey, I need to put a central line in.  Can you kind of give me the big pieces of the task that you’re going to perform?”
Belzberg:	Well, as always, and it sounds kind of mundane, but first and foremost, and more and more we have to decide, does this patient really need a central line?  It’s oftentimes we put in central lines because we can and because, you know, it’s challenging or it’s a procedure that people... it’s a skill that people pride themselves upon.  And so, first and foremost, is deciding whether the patient needs it, and that goes back to what I said a few minutes ago about what they do.  If you’re just putting a central line to give fluid and you’ve got decent peripheral access, regular IVs, then putting in a central line is just looking for trouble.  You can resuscitate somebody with two large bore peripheral IVs as well as or better than with the central line.  Now, if you need it for hemodynamic monitoring or for administering drugs to the heart, usually in the setting of a cardiac arrest, then you need a central line, but absent that, you know, you should really take into consideration whether you need to expose the patient to the risks associated with putting in a central line.  So that’s the routine thing that nobody wants to talk about, but it’s probably the most important element to the whole process.  So once you’ve identified a patient and decided that you’re going to put in a central line... I’m sorry, you want... no.
Q:	Just like the major tasks associated with the procedure.
Belzberg:	Okay.  So the first major task is identifying which site you’re going to use.  And do you want me to expand on that now or later?
Q:	No.  Just give me the tasks now.
Belzberg:	Okay.  Identify the site that you’re going to do.  I mean, even before that obtain consent if it’s appropriate.  The next thing is notify your coworkers, especially your nurses what you’re up to.  Gather your equipment.  Prep the patient.  Drape the patient.  Put on protective gear.  Open your kit and ensure that the kit has everything that you need and that it all works the way you think it’s going to work.  Then go ahead and perform the puncture.  Confirm the location of the catheter, and then place the final catheter and secure the catheter in place.  Place a dressing, appropriate dressing over the catheter.  Actually, before you put the dressing on, hook up the various lines, so that nothing is left unhooked up, which could be a problem.  Then secure the catheter.  Put a dressing on.  Order a chest x-ray.  Write a note, and check your chest x-ray.
Q:	And that’s it?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	Okay.  So basically I’m going to read back to you the steps that you described.  So the first step is really making a decision about indications or whether the patient even needs to have a catheter put in place.  The second step is identifying which sites you’re going to use.
Belzberg:	I would invert that.  I’d get consent first.
Q:	Obtain consent.  Before step one or before step two?
Belzberg:	Before step two.
Q:	Before step two, okay.  So that’s two, this is three.  And then, so three is identifying which site you would use.  Four is really kind of everything you described here to find your coworkers, gathering equipment, prepping the patient, draping the patient, that’s kind of all like preparing yourself and your patient to perform... getting ready to actually perform the procedure.  Would you say that’s true?
Belzberg:	I would, but as we were talking about before, I think those separate little elements that I gave you are very important, and that’s some of the stuff that you were saying that’s automatic learning.  I think for a more experienced person it’s automatic.  They expect the nurse to know what’s going on.  They expect to have the equipment available.
Q:	Right.  Well, we’re going to drill each step down.  We’re going to drill each one down.  So I’m going to get to all of that.
Belzberg:	So I predrilled a couple of them for you.
Q:	Yeah, you started on that.  That’s fine.  And then you’re going to actually perform the puncture.  That’s step five.  And then you’re going to step six, confirm location of the catheter.  Step seven, place the final catheter.  Step eight is hook up your lines.  Step nine is place dressing, secure catheter.
Belzberg:	Opposite.
Q:	Secure catheter, place dressing.  So I’ll switch those around.  And then the tenth step is really confirmation.  Confirm that your catheter is where it’s supposed to be.
Belzberg:	Yeah.  And do your paperwork.
Q:	And do your paperwork, okay.
Belzberg:	Never forget the paperwork.
Q:	You’re the first person to mention that.  So now what I’m going to do is I’m going to go and drill down each step.  This is the part that’s going to take a little bit.  So how much time of yours do I have?
Belzberg:	As much as you need.
Q:	I have a meeting at 4:00.  We should be okay.  So step one, deciding whether this patient needs a central line.  So tell me when a central line is indicated.
Belzberg:	A central line is indicated, a) when there’s inadequate peripheral access.  Meaning, peripheral veins in the arms or in other parts of the body.  So that’s an adequate peripheral access.  And that’s peripheral access for two things.  One is for fluid administration... actually, three things.  Fluid administration and drug administration, and the other thing is hemodynamic monitoring.
Q:	Any other indications?
Belzberg:	Certain specialized lines are put in for specialized access.  For example, we use much of the same approach for hemodialysis catheters, for example, but that’s really a separate category.  Occasionally, we would use a central line for CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy, or for placement of a pacemaker, something like that.  But those are really all kind of, I think, outside of the scope of this discussion.  There are other reasons that you would use this skill, but it would be in a different context.
Q:	So in general it’s really for access.
Belzberg:	For access and for monitoring.
Q:	And monitoring.  And who generally places central lines?
Belzberg:	In general, it is one of the more junior members of the team.  It’s typically a... it depends, you know, what generation you are.  In days gone by it was a medical student.  These days it’s a mid-level resident, and I suspect not too far away from that it’ll be an attending.
Q:	Any other indications that you think we need to discuss in this context with general surgery or resident education?
Belzberg:	No.
Q:	What about contraindications?  Are there times when you would not put a central line in?
Belzberg:	Yes.
Q:	What are those?
Belzberg:	Some of the specific contraindications, and there are no absolute contraindications as far as I’m concerned, but there are relative contraindications.  And the relative contraindications are both site specific.  There are some site specific contraindications, which basically what I mean by that is there’s certain circumstances where you wouldn’t use a neckline or a subclavian, and then there are general contraindications.  Let’s start with the general first.  The general is primarily high risk of bleeding.  Patients that are coagulopathic, for whatever reason, are at risk of increased complication rate.  And now I’ll go to the site specific ones.  The site specific ones are you would not choose to put in a subclavian line on the side where the patient only has one good lung.  You would not want to put a line in the groin in a patient who may have abdominal bleeding, secondary to trauma.  You would not want to necessarily put in a line in the neck in someone who is in cervical immobilization.  
Q:	Anything else?
Belzberg:	Again, I’m going down the list, you know, they’re softer and softer contraindications.  You would have a contradiction depending on the ease of access.  So somebody whose got a very, very squat neck and, you know, is very fat, then that would direct you in another direction, but it’s not really a contraindication.  It goes back to what we said about site selection.
Q:	So we can talk about that when we get to that step?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	And we can maybe go over more contraindications if you think of any when we’re there.
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	So now we’re going to obtain an informed consent.
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	Do you always do that?
Belzberg:	If it’s an emergency you do not need to do it.  If there’s no method for getting consent, then you don’t put a patient at risk.  There is some controversy about when you’re replacing a line, whether you need to get consent to replace a line.  Either over a guidewire or as part of a new stick.  I think most people, most reason people would say for a guidewire exchange you do not need consent.  For replacing a catheter because you have to move the site because of an infection or something like that, you may or may not need consent because it’s really continuation of a therapy.  And this is a (sic) area of a great deal of controversy.  It’s like you don’t get consent in the OR for each step of the operation, you know, you get consent to do an appendectomy.  You don’t get consent to open the fascia.  You don’t get consent to use blue thread instead of green thread.  It’s kind of a package deal if you’re doing an appendectomy.  So if you need central venous access, it’s a package deal.  So there’s a little bit of controversy, but in these days if you can get consent... the better you can get consent, the better off you are.
Q:	So now we’re on step three, identifying which site you will use.  So just explain briefly the three sites.
Belzberg:	The three sites are the internal jugular, the next site is the subclavian, and the third site is the femoral.
Q:	And when would you use each site or what’s your preferred place?
Belzberg:	Much of the decision... I’m going to divide this into two groups.  There are, what we call, high lines, which is subclavian and internal jugular, and then groin lines.  And groin lines are used predominately for emergency vascular access.  They are not good for hemodynamic monitoring, and they have an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and possibly or probably increased risk of sepsis.  So they are really emergency and short-term lines.  They’re also not useful in patients that may have abdominal bleeding.  So that’s the story on the groin lines.
Q:	So if you need emergency vascular access quickly and it’s a short-term, then you would use a femoral line.
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	And if they have no abdominal bleeding.
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	Now, if they have abdominal bleeding, but you still needed that quick access, would you use a different site or would you use the femoral?
Belzberg:	The old teaching used to be, and it’s not an unreasonable thing, when you have a vigorous resuscitation going on, you should have one line one each side of the diaphragm.  So it would be determined by the context where you might want to have... if you had two good peripheral IVs in the arm and you could get fluid through it, but you still wanted, for whatever reason, a third access point, then even in the face of bleeding, what I would do is I would probably select what I was giving through that line.  Meaning, that if I worried about... let’s say I have an arm line and a groin line, and I was worried about abdominal bleeding and I was going to transfuse blood, I’d transfuse the blood through the arm line rather than through the groin line.  So in a crunch you get what you can get, but if you can’t get an upper line and you need a line, you do what you can.  It may not be ideal, but you have to do what you have to do.
Q:	So if it was truly an emergency and you couldn’t get an upper line in the face of (overtalking)...
Belzberg:	Yeah, I would still do it, but I would be anxious to get an alternative as soon as I could.
Q:	What about the IJ?  When would you put in the internal jugular?
Belzberg:	The IJ is popularized by an anesthesiologist.  And the reason that it’s popularized by the anesthesiologist, it’s on the anesthesia side of the blood brain barrier, so that they can get access to the neck while the surgeons are working or prepping the chest, the abdomen or any other organ area except the neck and the head.  So the anesthesiologists are very comfortable and enthusiastic about that line.  The advantages of it are a) it’s accessible to the head of the bed, b) it is at least statistically less likely to induce apneumothorax.  That is, it’s not absolute, but largely you don’t worry as much about apneumothorax with a (sic) internal jugular approach, and... I’m sorry, you wanted the advantages of it?
Q:	Well, when would you select an IJ over (overtalking)...?
Belzberg:	For example, you were working on... if somebody was going to get an operation or some treatment on the chest.  If their body habitus lended  itself more towards an IJ, if they were very obese and if they’ve got big, you know, fat or what have you, and both in the groin and the upper chest, you might do that.  If you have concerns about pulmonary function, meaning that you may have apneumothorax or you may have impaired respirations, for whatever reason, you might opt for a (sic) internal jugular.  And one very obscure reason is if you’re concerned about putting in a transvenous pacemaker, the optimal site is the right internal jugular, because that’s a straight shot to the apex of the heart, and there are no valves in the way.  So if you need to thread a transvenous pacemaker, that’s the easiest approach.
Q:	So if the patient needs a central line and possibly a pacemaker, you would do that?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	Any other indications or times you would choose an IJ over any other site?
Belzberg:	Not really.  And do you want some downsides to it now?
Q:	Yeah.  When would you not choose an IJ?
Belzberg:	When I would not choose an IJ is a) when I did not have skill or availability of ultrasound to guide my procedure, because it is certainly state of the art, and it’s becoming standard of care to use ultrasonic guidance for internal jugular line placement.  I wouldn’t use it again if there are, obviously, for mechanical reasons, if somebody’s going to be operating on the skull or on the face or something like that, it’s an inconvenient place to have a line.  And if I had easy and reasonable approach to the subclavian, I would not use a (sic) internal jugular because of the increased risk of infection, difficulty in maintaining stability and cleanliness of the insertion site.
Q:	So it’s difficult to keep it clean or...
Belzberg:	Yeah, especially somebody in the ICU, they typically are intubated.  They’ve got trach tape around, they always have secretions.  I call it ‘slobber’ coming out of their mouth, and it’s, you know, think about it.  Their neck is always yucky.  And also they’re going to be moving around and their neck, you know, you’re going to move the tip of the catheter because they’re doing this or doing that.  I don’t know if that comes across on the tape.  
Q:	Yeah.  No... okay, so let’s talk about subclavian then.  When would you pick subclavian?
Belzberg:	Subclavian is, according to the CDC now, the site of choice for central venous catheterization.  
Q:	We’re returning with Dr. Howard Belzberg, talking about central line placement.  So we were talking about subclavian, when you would choose subclavian, and we left with the CDC, it’s now the site of choice.
Belzberg:	The CDC, it’s now the site of choice.  If I’m going to do it for any long-term, more than a couple of three days, it’s very preferable because it’s stable and it’s easy to keep clean.  I also like it for it’s a very good place to put in a catheter that will accurately monitor pressure in the superior vena cava and also oxygen tension in the superior vena cava.  Some of these catheters have fiber optic bundles in them that allows us to measure oxygen saturation on a continuous basis.
Q:	Can that happen in the IJ also?
Belzberg:	The IJ or the subclavian you can use it.  Femoral, not so much.  The other advantages are familiarity.  I find, personally, that the anatomy is more reliable, more consistent for the subclavian than it is for the internal jugular.
Q:	Any time you would not use the subclavian?
Belzberg:	I would not use it if the patient had very marginal lung function, and I would certainly choose the opposite side.  I would choose the side with the worst lung function to put in the catheter if I had to go to a lung.
Q:	Anything else?
Belzberg:	The only other down thing, again, if the patient, as I said before, if there’s coagulopathy, that’s a relative contraindication depending on the severity.  One of the concerns about the subclavian is, is that it’s hard to compress it.  You really can’t put pressure on it, whereas the femoral and the internal jugular, it’s easier to compress it.  If I was worried about bleeding, then I would probably opt for another site, but I’d have to be pretty worried about it.
Q:	And we’ve talked about the femoral already.  So basically just so I repeat back to you that I have it right.  That would be your least preference, least preferred site, but really in the case of... if it was an extreme case where you needed emergency vascular access...
Belzberg:	Then it becomes a more viable... a better choice.
Q:	Now, if you put a femoral line in to stabilize a patient, and then now the patient’s up in the ICU, how long would you leave that line in for or how quickly would you change that line?
Belzberg:	In general, all lines that are put in as emergency lines should be removed within 24 hours.  Largely, in the femoral because there’s specific problems, but in general if it’s an emergency line, the chances that you used the proper sterile technique, etc., etc., are much diminished.  So any line that’s put in as an emergency line... and the way, practically, we deal with this is that if it’s not documented in the chart that strict precautions were maintained, then that’s considered an emergency line and considered a dirty line, and it should be changed within 24 hours.
Q:	And would you change the site or you would just change... like if it was a subclavian, would you change over the catheter?
Belzberg:	Changing over a wire, using exchanged wire, is an acceptable technique, in general.  As long as the patient doesn’t have evidence of bloodstream infection and doesn’t have any local evidence, you know, puss, redness, anything like that, or you know for a fact there was gross contamination at the time of the line placement.  I mean, if you put the line in yourself and you did it barehanded or something like that, you know, then I would probably opt to change the site.  But, in general, it’s been shown that changing over a guidewire is probably safer than a new stick.
Q:	We’re still on identifying the site.  I have one more question.  So you have two IJs, two subclavians and two femorals.  Is there a reason or a choice of preferred left/right?  When would you choose the right and when would you choose the left?  
Belzberg:	There are some very subtle things.  As I said, if I’m thinking about a pacemaker, I would prefer the right internal jugular, so it’s a straight shot.  All things being equal, I prefer the right subclavian because the thoracic duct empties into the left subclavian, and every couple of hundred lines that somebody puts in, they either lacerate or cannulate the thoracic duct, which is a pain in the neck.  And so, again, all things being equal, no reason one way or another, probably a right subclavian is favored, but it’s a close call.  It’s one of these 51/49.
Q:	Close call between the right and the left subclavian?
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	The subclavian is your first choice.
Belzberg:	Subclavian is my first choice.
Q:	So you would do a right, then a left, then go to IJs, and then femorals, and right being your first IJ you would choose unless (overtalking)....
Belzberg:	If I’m thinking about a pacemaker.  If I’m not thinking about a pacemaker then it’s fielder’s choice.
Q:	Very good.  So now we’re on step four, and that’s really preparing for the procedure, and you’ve given me some information about this already about you would gather your equipment, you would prep the patient, let your coworkers know, drape, put on protective gear.  So walk me through.  Now, you’re walking into the room and they say, “Dr. Belzberg, can you go put a line in Bed 4.”  Walk me through what’s going through your head and what you’re going to do.
Belzberg:	Well, the first thing that’s going through my head is can I get somebody else to do it.
Q:	There’s nobody else around.  You sent them all to Mexico for the weekend.
Belzberg:	Well, as I said, the first thing is I’m going to make sure that the patient needs it.  I’m going to get consent if I can.  If the patient is coherent I’ll tell the patient what I’m planning to do, and I may get consent directly from the patient if that’s appropriate.  Then I will examine the patient, look at the various sites to help me make my decision as to which side it is.  At this time I’ve already told my nurse colleagues that this is what I’m up to and that they need to make themselves available and get set up.  One thing that we haven’t talked about... can I go...
Q:	Sure.  Yeah, go ahead.
Belzberg:	Is that there needs to be... depending on what you’re going to use the line for and how you’re going to use it, there needs to be some mechanics set up.  You may need a transducer setup, you may need a series of three-way stopcocks.  You will definitely need some IV infusion bags.  You may need a pressure bag if you’re doing an aggressive transfusion.  And I take that out of the specific of placing the central line, because most of those tasks are done independently and by somebody else.  Very few doctors know how to set up a pressure transducer, so I’m sure you remember from your days.
Q:	But you need to know that it needs to be there.
Belzberg:	That it needs to be done.  Yeah.  And you need to check with your nurse to make sure that she’s, you know, done it, because sometimes you have a less experienced nurse, and may not remember or recognize what they need to do.  So that’s why I make an issue about telling your nursing colleagues what you’re up to, and I try and give them as much lead time as I can, because that way if they’re taking care of another patient or they’ve got somebody else doing a procedure in the next room, that they can organize stuff.  I usually ask permission, “When can I put in a central line?”  And then I come back and do it.  Whose going to want to do when they’re giving a report or when they’re taking somebody out to a CT scan or God knows what.  So I usually ask when is a good time and schedule it that way.  I don’t know if it’s really pertinent, but it’s important, is that it builds good teamwork that everybody is taken into consideration and their demands are respected.  It’s not like, “Okay, I’m here.  I’m the doctor.  Drop everything because I’m here.”  Sometimes you have to be that way, but if you don’t have to be that, you shouldn’t be that way.
Q:	So you’ve got your equipment all set up.
Belzberg:	You got your equipment all set up, and you’ve checked to make sure you have all the equipment that you need, because you don’t want to send people running at the last minute for a stitch or for an extra drape or some cleansing material or something.  And so you make sure you’ve got your equipment.  Then you do your prep, your skin prep.  
Q:	And how do you do that?
Belzberg:	Nowadays we use chlorhexidine, and they come in these little sponge-tip dispensers.  And this is why you have to know your equipment, in some kits there are chlorhexidine applicators built in to the kit, and in some cases you have to get them separately from a supply, somewhere else.  That’s why I make a point you need to know what’s in your kit.  And so you put on your chlorhexidine, and then at that point my practice is, I will then put on my gown, hat, mask and not in that order.  I usually put on the hat first, then the mask, then the gown, then the gloves.  Then at that point now I will drape the patient.  I will get full body draping of the patient, head to toe.   
Q:	And what position is the patient in?
Belzberg:	Again, part of that depends on where you’re going.  If you’re going internal jugular, the patient can be lying prone.  If you’re going subclavian, you want them in slight reverse Trendelenberg or, you know, with feet up.  Because if you get an air embolism you’d rather it go to the heart than to go to the brain, and you also want to fill the vessels.  
Q:	If IJ, then prone.  If subclavian, then slight Trendelenberg.
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	If femoral?
Belzberg:	Prone.  Now, one little trick that has to do indirect... if you’re doing a subclavian and you’re having difficulty accessing the vessel, one thing that sometimes helps is to have somebody reach under the drapes and pull down on the arm, extend the arm, because that can, then, open up the shoulder a little bit and allow you better excess.  So it’s not a bad idea.  If I know it’s going to be a tough stick or something I may put a restraint on the arm and let the string hang down, so somebody can just grab that and pull on that, and not have to do gymnastics to get under the drapes and what have you.
Q:	So we’re in the room and you’ve now prepped the site, you’re draped, you’ve draped the patient, you’ve positioned the patient.
Belzberg:	Oh, I forgot, eye protection.
Q:	Eye protection.  Anything else before you’re actually going to...
Belzberg:	Well, I feel the anatomy.  Now that I’m draped and the patient is draped, etc., etc., now I’ve got my gloves on, now I want to reconfirm my anatomical landmarks.  If I’m doing an IJ, at this point I’ll be using the ultrasound to confirm the position of the jugular vein.  If I’m doing subclavian I’ll use my fingers to feel the sternal notch as well as the curvature of the clavicle.
Q:	Any tricks about the femoral?
Belzberg:	The femoral, the trick is that you when you’re putting in a femoral you really have to feel the pulse.  And you remember that it’s nerve, artery, vein, Y, maybe is how I remember it.  So the nerve is the most lateral, then the artery, the vein is a little bit more central, and then the Y of the legs.  So you want to be a little bit medial to the femoral pulse.  Usually, you know, a fingertip or so medial to the femoral pulse.  And you definitely want to be able to feel a pulse.  Just poking is rarely successful, sometimes, but rarely.
Q:	So now you’re sterile.  You’ve felt your anatomy.  You have your ultrasound machine ready if you’re doing an IJ, and what are you going to do next?
Belzberg:	Next, I’m going to assemble my equipment and basically what I’m going to do is I’m going to take my syringe... well, again, depending on the status of the patient, I may or may not opt to give local anesthetic.  If I give local anesthetic, I’ll use the Lidocaine that comes in the kit and use the smallest needle and syringe.  I may even use that needle as a finder needle.  If I’m doing an IJ approach, I’m may use the anesthetic needle as a finder needle to advance and until I’m in where I think I am, and I can, then, track that needle with my larger catheter.
Q:	So let’s just talk about this for a minute.  So you said depending on the patient, you may give Lidocaine.  What patients are those?
Belzberg:	Patients that can feel pain.
Q:	They’re not otherwise sedated.
Belzberg:	Not otherwise heavily sedated.  If somebody’s paralyzed and on a big time fentanyl drip, etc., etc., I feel less compulsion.  It’s not unreasonable to take the position that everybody should get some local anesthetic.  Again, a little bit of that is judgment, because you’re not poking the patient twice.  If you’re confident then you’re good, you can get it all over with with one poke, and you don’t gain anything by poking them with an anesthetic.  The other thing is the local anesthetic, a) it can slow you down a little bit because it takes a few minutes to take its maximal effect, and b) it can sometimes, although it’s reaching, can obscure your landmarks, you know, if you put in too big of a (inaudible)... or a welt.  I suspect there are some other people if you’re talking about it, that jump up and down when I say, “Let’s skip the local anesthetic.”
Q:	So just so I’m clear, so if I could ask you to put this into like a statement.  If the patient can feel pain, then you would...
Belzberg:	Then I would give a local anesthetic.
Q:	When would you not give it?
Belzberg:	In a patient who was paralyzed and heavily sedated, or is comatose for some other reason.
Q:	It would not be necessary.
Belzberg:	It’s just not necessary.
Q:	So now you gave them local anesthetic.
Belzberg:	Right.  And so now I assemble my syringe and at this point it’s very important that I’ve got my syringe, and I think I told you last time, there’s a little trick where I line up the bevel of the needle with the numbers on the side of the syringe, so that I know which direction the bevel is going as I’m passing my guidewire.  So what I always do at this point is I always check that the needle that I’m using will accommodate the guidewire that I intend to use, and I actually physically do that.  I pass the guidewire through, so I’m sure that I don’t have too small a needle.  And then I make selection as to whether I’m going to use a plastic over-the-needle-catheter, usually called an angio-cath or a metal needle as my tool for announcing my guidewire.
Q:	So bringing us to when would you use which one?  When would you use the plastic needle?
Belzberg:	I, in general, prefer to use the plastic.  The reason I prefer to use the plastic is I don’t like the idea of fussing around with a sharp stiff needle in the vein as I’m changing the syringe and putting on a new thing, and so I prefer using the angio-cath for that reason, because then I can get the needle out and I don’t have anything sharp.  The downside of that is it’s one more manipulation and depending on the kit that you’re using, some of the kits have a gadget where you can pass the guidewire through the barrel of the syringe, and you don’t need to disconnect the needle from the syringe.  But that only works with the needles.  It doesn’t work with the angio-cath.
Q:	So if you were using that type of kit would you do the needle then?
Belzberg:	It would tilt me more in favor of that, but it wouldn’t... it’s not a (sic) absolute.  I would still kind of ponder which one I would want to use.  But it would tilt me in favor of that a little bit.  Certainly, if I didn’t have that kit, then that would tilt me in favor of the angio-cath.
Q:	So now you’ve checked your guidewire, you’ve selected...
Belzberg:	Your site.  And now I make my approach, and depending on the anatomy and wherever I make my approach, and a couple of fine points if you really want to get very, very fine is, some people, including myself, will draw up a little bit of local anesthetic into their syringe before they poke, and then inject a little bit of that fluid after you’ve gone through the skin, because occasionally you can get a core of skin in the needle, which would then impede the return flow.  I mean, that’s kind of very subtle and sophisticated, but it’s something that you can do.  And also sometimes that’s kind of the balance between giving or not giving a local anesthetic.  If you put a little bit of local anesthetic in your big needle, as you’re going in you may give a little bit, although it’s probably treating you more than treating the patient.  So then make your skin puncture, and depending on which site you’ve selected, you aim for the vessel.  If you’re using the subclavian you’d pick an aim point.  I use the angle of the jaw.  Other people use the opposite shoulder, the opposite ear, the phase of the moon, whatever.
Q:	How do you select that site?  Just from experience of doing it?
Belzberg:	What do you mean?
Q:	How did you pick the angle of the jaw versus the chin?
Belzberg:	Just from personal experience, because as you’re selecting your angle, you have to kind of in your mind’s eye pick some angle, and everybody has been lucky or taught different ways.  There’s no hard and fast one.  If you’re doing a subclavian, you make your initial puncture about two finger breadths below the junction of the middle and the thistle third of the clavicle.  And if you feel the clavicle, you’ll feel that there’s a curve, almost a notch right there.  And so you go about two finger breadths below that, make your skin, then flatten out your needle, advance the needle until you feel the clavicle, then slightly increase the angle of the needle and advance it underneath the clavicle.  As soon as you change that angle, you want to make sure you’ve got a little bit of negative pressure on the syringe, put a little suction on it, because you want to get a flush of blood.  Once you get free flow of blood, you pass the guidewire through whatever apparatus you’ve done.  And this may be the most crucial part of the whole thing, is the guidewire should go in with no resistance.  The guidewire should fall in, basically.  If you have to force the guidewire, you’re probably not in the right place.
Q:	So then what do you do if you have to force it?
Belzberg:	If you have to force it, you should take out the guidewire, put the syringe back on the needle and reposition the tip of your needle until you get, once again, get good return, good blood flow, and then you, again, try and pass the guidewire.
Q:	Returning with Dr. Howard Belzberg on June 2nd, 2009.  So we’re talking about the guidewire.  So if you meet resistance, you pull it out and you start again.
Belzberg:	And you reposition.  And once you’ve got guidewire well-secured... or once the guidewire has been advanced sufficiently, meaning that it should be at least two to three inches beyond... the tip of the guidewire should be at least two to three inches beyond the tip of the needle.  And there are markings on the guidewire that will tell you that.  That’s another reason to check to pass the guidewire while you’re getting set up, so you can look at it and see how much guidewire you need to put in to be two to three inches beyond the tip of the needle.
Q:	So that’s a general kind of rule of thumb, two to three inches?
Belzberg:	Yeah.  You don’t want it much longer than that, and while you’re passing it you want to be watching for arrhythmias, because sometimes you can become over-enthusiastic and put the guidewire all the way down into the right atrium or in the right ventricle, and then you can irritate the heart and cause arrhythmias. 
Q:	And if this happens, what do you do?
Belzberg:	Pull it back.  It’s important to that catheter-induced arrhythmias are not responsive to anti-arrhythmic drugs.  The treatment for catheter-induced arrhythmia is get rid of the catheter.
Q:	Remove the irritant.
Belzberg:	Yeah.  
Q:	Any other routine problems that can happen with this task?  Anything?
Belzberg:	Yeah, the one other thing is as you prepare to introduce the guidewire, if you’re not using up through the barrel syringe, you actually have to disconnect the syringe from the needle and/or the angio-cath.  At that point, you’re at risk of allowing air to enter the circulation and causing an air embolism.  So as you disconnect the syringe, you have to keep your thumb over the end of the needle, so that you occlude that while you’re grabbing your guidewire, and then passing the guidewire through.
Q:	Anything else about the guidewire?
Belzberg:	So once you’ve got the guidewire in place, you want to take out your needle, and as soon as you take out your needle, you should put a clamp on the end of the guidewire, so that it doesn’t slip in.  Now you’ve got your guidewire in place and a clamp on the end of it.  You take your 15-blade scalpel and run the dull side of the blade alongside the guidewire and make a generous incision, like a quarter of an inch, at least.  So now you’ve done that with your 15-blade.  You get rid of the 15-blade.  And now you assemble your catheter, your introducer.  Now, wait a second.  Let me ask you, there’s a slight divergence here if you’re just putting in like a triple lumen or you want to put in an introducer.  If you’re putting in a triple lumen, okay, for a triple lumen you then have a dilator in the kit, and you take that dilator, you unclamp the guidewire, you hold on to the guidewire at the skin, and you pass the introducer... the dilator over the guidewire.  As soon as the guidewire sticks out, the end of the dilator, put your clamp back on.  Now you hold your guidewire in one position, steady and advance the dilator, and run it back and forth a few times, because that will establish your track to pass your catheter.  So once you’ve done that a few times and you feel comfortable, then it’s pretty smooth, then, again, you pull back on your dilator, keep your finger on the tip of where the guidewire enters the skin, take off your clamp, take off the guidewire, take off the introducer, and put your device, your triple lumen, whatever device you’re going to use, over the guidewire, and feed out, make sure that there’s guidewire sticking out of the end of your catheter, and put the clamp back on it.  Before you let go of this, you put the clamp back on here.  So you’ve always got control of the guidewire.  Now I’ve got my clamp here.  Now, again, holding my guidewire in one position, I advance the catheter that I’m using until I am comfortably in, and that depends a little bit on the body habitus, but you want to be in far enough so that you are in the descending vena cava, but above the pericardial reflection, which usually translates, so you’d like the tip about two fingers breadths below the sternal clavicular junction.
Q:	Now, before we move on to the next step, you just gave me all the details of performing the puncture and getting the catheter in.  What are some routine problems or where do students or residents have the most trouble with that step from your experience?
Belzberg:	There are two big areas.  The biggest one probably is finding the vessel, is actually going under, getting your anatomy, getting comfortable enough with the anatomy and the specifics of the patient to the find the vessel.  That is almost always the big challenge of this whole procedure, that’s the one thing that’s really skill and not mechanical, is really finding the vessel.  So that’s the biggest thing.  The other big thing is... two other big things, is  one is not... I’m sorry, three.  One is not lacerating the artery.  We frown on that.
Q:	That’s a big artery to lacerate.
Belzberg:	Yeah.  Either one, either the carotid or the subclavian.  So you don’t want to lacerate the artery.  You don’t want to drop the lung.  You don’t want to cause apneumothorax, and you don’t want to cause an air embolism.
Q:	Now, if you lacerate the artery...
Belzberg:	Direct pressure for literally, and this you have to be very strict about, direct pressure with a four by four, around the bottom of the (inaudible)..., watching the clock for five minutes, not one of these, “Okay, I think it stopped.”  You actually stand there and watch the clock with your finger pressing down on the site for five minutes.  That’s the standard, simple solution.  And then you have to follow the patient closely.  You want to feel for a pulse to make sure you still have a pulse, which you almost always do, and watch them to make sure they don’t have ongoing bleeding.  If there is any evidence of ongoing blood loss, you need a surgical consultation to decide whether you need angiographic or open repair.
Q:	And apneumothorax, you put a chest tube in.
Belzberg:	Apneumothorax you put in a chest tube.
Q:	Now, the air embolism, is that when they... you take the guidewire out and you put your thumb over?
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	So do they fail to put their thumb over?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	Is that how they get that air embolism?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	So you kind of went through the subclavian.  How is the IJ approach or femoral approach different?  You don’t have to describe the whole thing again, but just...
Belzberg:	The IJ basically you want to feel for the carotid pulse.  And there’s several different approaches, but you feel for the two bellies of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and between those two bellies you’ll feel the carotid pulse.  You want to pull the carotid out of the way, and then look with your ultrasound to see you have a compressible vessel alongside of it, and that’s how you identify where it is.  And this is where many people will put in a finder needle to make sure that they’re in the right place.  And that’s the way you do the internal jugular.  And the femoral, as I said, is you feel for a femoral pulse.  You want to probably go, if you can, go below the inguinal ligament and feel for a femoral pulse, and then go just medial to the femoral pulse to find the femoral vein.
Q:	And all the mechanics are the same with the dilator and the wire?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	So you had mentioned there’s different devices to choose from, a triple lumen, a double lumen, and a cordis.  When would you use a triple lumen?  When would you use a double lumen?  When would you use a cordis?
Belzberg:	We rarely use double lumens anymore, but if you’re being very... if you know you have a very limited need for the catheter, and the less lumens, the less risk of infection.  Although, it’s almost never used anymore.  We’ve gotten away from that.  A triple lumen you would use if you’re predominately doing this for drug and modest fluid administration and hemodynamic monitoring.  You would use a cordis, which is the proper name for a Swan introducer.  And you would use that if you want to give large volume resuscitation and/or if you plan to place a pulmonary artery catheter.  
Q:	That was the hardest step, I think, the most detailed.  Now you have to confirm the location of the catheter.  So tell me about that.
Belzberg:	There are a couple of things that you can do.  The first thing is when you are taking your thumb off the tip, the needle, you want to make sure you’re not getting pulsatile flow, because that means you’re not in a good place.  If you’re unsure whether you’re getting pulsatile flow or not, there are two things you can do... or three things you can do.  One is you can hook the transducer that your nurse has hooked up, hook it up to the barrel of the needle and look at the waveform, and if it’s an arterial waveform, you know you’re not in the right place.  You can also send the blood for a blood gas, and if the oxygen saturation is greater than 90% or 85%, chances are you’re in the artery.  The other simple thing you can do is, you can actually hook up your IV bag to your needle and lower the bag below the level of the bed, and then raise the bag, and blood should stop flowing once you get about 10 centimeters above the level of the heart.  If you’re a meter above the level of the heart and blood is still coming up, that means that the pressure is higher than 100 centimeters of water, and that’s arterial pressure.  So you want the blood to stop flowing when you get somewhere between 5 and 20 centimeters above the level of the heart.
Q:	So if you suspect you’re in the artery and you suspect it by seeing a pulsatile flow, would you suspect it, and then you would hook up the transducer (overtalking)...
Belzberg:	If you’re convinced at any point in time that you’re in the artery, you don’t have to do anything more, you pull out and you come back to fight another day.  So if I put the needle in and I’m getting [MAKES SOUND EFFECTS], I don’t need to confirm that.  The time you need to confirm it is somebody who may be already borderline hypotensive.  You may not be fully in the vessel, you may be in the wall or something like that, and you’re getting something that looks a little bit like the blood is too red.  It may be or it may not be that you’re in the artery.  So then you use these alternate tools.  And the reason I put it in that order is because of the simplicity.  The easiest thing is to see, you know, that.  The next easiest thing is hooking it up to the transducer, because the nurse should have the transducer ready anyway to measure the CPP.  The third easiest thing is to use the bag business.  And then the last easiest thing is to get the blood gas, because then you have to wait until somebody takes the blood gas, runs it and brings you back an answer, etc., etc.  By that time you’ve usually figured it out.
Q:	So now what do we do?
Belzberg:	So now you’ve dilated, you’ve got your guidewires still in place, you pass your device, whatever that is... I’m sorry, I want to back up.  If you’re putting in a cordis what you do is you put your introducer through the cordis, so you do it as a single step.  So you use the introducer.  The introducer will stick out five or six centimeters beyond the end of the cordis.  So you just use it and advance it that way, and then once you’ve felt like you’ve dilated, then you advance the whole thing and pull out the dilator and the guidewire at the same time.
Q:	I remember that.  I do remember something about the ICU.
Belzberg:	So that’s the difference... why I said there was a difference, because if you’re just putting in the triple lumen and you can’t... you have to do it in two steps.  If you’re putting in a cordis, you can put it in in one step.
Q:	So now we’re still on confirm location of catheter.  Anything else you’re going to do for that step?
Belzberg:	You should, especially if you’re doing it in the chest, you should go to the hospital museum and find a stethoscope someplace and listen and see if you’ve got breath sounds on both sides, because, again, you’re worried about apneumothorax, and then you want to hook up your catheter to your transducer and see a proper venous waveform.
Q:	That’s the hookup lines?
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	So we’ve performed the puncture, we’ve put everything through.  So confirm location of catheter being when you’re deciding if it’s venous or arterial, then you place the final catheter?
Belzberg:	Right.
Q:	Or it happens sort of all during that time, so to speak.
Belzberg:	You may have concerns about arterial placement at either point, either when you put in your initial needle or after you’ve done the guidewire thing and you put in your final catheter.  So you may pick that up at either point.  Preferably...
Q:	So it’s a suspicion you just always...
Belzberg:	You always get that suspicion.
Q:	So now you’ve hooked up your lines.
Belzberg:	And you want to check and see that you’ve got a nice venous waveform on your bedside monitor, and then you secure your line with whatever you like.  I, personally, prefer stitching them in, but other people are happy taping them in.  And then you order a chest x-ray... or then you take off your drapes and put on a dry, sterile or a (sic) occlusive dressing, depending on whatever flavor your unit nurse wants to use.  And then you order a chest x-ray, write your note and check the chest x-ray.
Q:	What are you looking for on the chest x-ray?
Belzberg:	Two things.  One is how far in the catheter is because, as I said, you want it in the superior vena cava within about two centimeters below the sternoclavicular junction.  If it’s too far in, if it’s much below that, you’ll want to pull back on the catheter.  It also sometimes these catheters can go up the neck.  If it’s going up the neck you can sort of use it for fluid administration... for drug administration, but it’s not reliable for pressure monitoring.  Ideally, it’s going down and it almost always is, but once in a while they go up the neck.  And then so you want to check for the position of the tip of the catheter, that it’s not too low, it’s not in the wrong direction.  And then you also want to check for evidence of problems like apneumothorax or a hemothorax.  
Q:	And the guidewire.
Belzberg:	Well, that shouldn’t even be a question.
Q:	But here we are.
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	So how do you know when you’ve successfully accomplished the task?  How do you know that you’ve achieved what you...
Belzberg:	When I get an arousing round of applause from the nursing staff.  The job is finished when I confirm the position and I know I’ve got good venous tracing and a good fluid flow, and my x-ray has confirmed by position and lack of complications.
Q:	So I started a list of equipment and I just want to make sure I have everything.  So you need a transducer, IV infusion bags, pressure bag, central line kit, need to know what’s in the kit, and you need a gown, hat, mask, eye protective wear and gloves.  Anything else?
Belzberg:	Yeah.  Usually the kits don’t have a full sheet drape.  So you need drapes to provide head to toe coverage.
Q:	Is that all the equipment and materials?
Belzberg:	And dressing material.
Q:	Dressing material.  And they should bring that in the room with them.
Belzberg:	Yeah.  Again, sometimes that’s in the kit, and sometimes it’s not.  Usually it’s not.
Q:	Based on your experience putting in central lines, where do you see the problems with the residents are?  I know you talked about finding the site and we talked specifically about one step, but just overall.
Belzberg:	Overall, it’s inattention to sterile technique.  I’ll make a little joke, if you will.  There are certain procedures that I call high risk, low glory procedures.  The best example of a high risk, low glory procedure is a circumcision.  Nobody ever gives you an award for being the best circumciser in the hospital.  But you mess one up and you’ll hear about it for the rest of your career.  Central lines are in that category.  Nobody ever says, “Oh, that was a great central line placement,” but if you drop the lung, if you lacerate the artery, if you puncture the heart, if you have any complication, you’re going to hear about it for the rest of your... certainly, the rest of your rotation.  And so these are high risk, low glory procedures, which tends to lend themselves to being things that people don’t pay a lot of attention to.  They consider them mundane or routine.  And that’s where, I think, you get into trouble is because it’s mundane or it’s routine.  They don’t pay attention to it.
Q:	So do you rely on any sensory experiences?  You said you can kind of feel when you’re at the clavicle.  You get like a pop when you’re in the artery.  Is there any smell, feel...
Belzberg:	The biggest feeling thing that I would say is, as I said, is that when you’re putting in your guidewire, that it’s really floating in very easily, you’re not feeling any obstruction or having to pressure it.  As far as a pop, some people say they feel a pop.  I don’t reliably feel... I mean, you feel it sometimes, but I don’t rely on that, but I really rely on seeing the blood return and the syringe.
Q:	Now, of all the terms and things we’ve talked about today, is there anything that would be new or novel to a resident that would need to be explained to them?  I assume they know the anatomy when... are we making assumptions that maybe they don’t know?
Belzberg:	Yes.  I don’t think that they, you know, obviously it depends on the level of the person, but the people coming out of, you know, from a variety of different backgrounds may or may not have a (sic) appreciation of the anatomy.  I am almost certain that the use of the ultrasound is something new for many of them.  This would be the only or the first exposure that most of them would have to use any ultrasound.  So that’s, I think, an area that requires significant focus.
Q:	So that’s good for the teaching of the GME students to make sure we... because I think we just teach them subclavian.  We got to start doing the IJ.
Belzberg:	Yeah.
Q:	Good.  Any questions for me?
Belzberg:	No.  Did you get everything you needed?  That’s the only question.
Q:	Absolutely.  Probably more than I need.  I think I got it twice.
